<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Hints towards the formation of a more comprehensive theory of life.</title>
      <author><name reg="Coleridge, Samuel Taylor">Samuel Taylor Coleridge</name></author>
      <editor><name reg="Watson, Seth B.">Seth B. Watson, M.D.</name></editor>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>January 17, 2008</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">24346</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2008-01-17">January 17, 2008</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Bryan Ness, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
            Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            Page-images available at
            &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID44f9b6938a498/&gt;
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x0153">
      <charName>oelig</charName>
      <desc>LATIN SMALL LIGATURE OE</desc>
      <mapping>oe</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b1">
      <charName>alpha</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA</desc>
      <mapping>a</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b4">
      <charName>delta</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA</desc>
      <mapping>d</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b5">
      <charName>epsilon</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON</desc>
      <mapping>e</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b7">
      <charName>eta</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA</desc>
      <mapping>ae</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b8">
      <charName>theta</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA</desc>
      <mapping>th</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03b9">
      <charName>iota</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA</desc>
      <mapping>i</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03ba">
      <charName>kappa</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA</desc>
      <mapping>k</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03bb">
      <charName>lambda</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMBDA</desc>
      <mapping>l</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03bc">
      <charName>mu</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER MU</desc>
      <mapping>m</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03bd">
      <charName>nu</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER NU</desc>
      <mapping>n</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c0">
      <charName>pi</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER PI</desc>
      <mapping>p</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c1">
      <charName>rho</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO</desc>
      <mapping>r</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c2">
      <charName>sigmaf</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA</desc>
      <mapping>s</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c3">
      <charName>sigma</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA</desc>
      <mapping>s</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c4">
      <charName>tau</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU</desc>
      <mapping>t</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x03c9">
      <charName>omega</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA</desc>
      <mapping>o</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f00">
      <charName>alpha</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PSILI</desc> <!-- smooth -->
      <mapping>a</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f02">
      <charName>alpha</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PSILI AND VARIA</desc> <!-- smooth,grave -->
      <mapping>a</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f10">
      <charName>epsilon</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI</desc> <!-- smooth -->
      <mapping>e</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f51">
      <charName>upsilon</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH DASIA</desc> <!-- rough -->
      <mapping>u</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f73">
      <charName>epsilon</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH OXIA</desc> <!-- acute -->
      <mapping>e</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f77">
      <charName>iota</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA</desc> <!-- acute -->
      <mapping>i</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x1f79">
      <charName>omicron</charName>
      <desc>GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA</desc> <!-- acute -->
      <mapping>o</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center; bold">Hints Towards the Formation of a More Comprehensive Theory Of Life</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center; bold">by S. T. Coleridge</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center; bold">Edited by Seth B. Watson, M.D.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Of St. John's College,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">And Formerly One of the Physicians to the Hospital at Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Magna sunt opera Domini exquisita in omnes voluntates ejus.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">London: John Churchill, Princes Street, Soho</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MDCCCXLVIII.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: small; text-align: center; bold">C. and J. Adlard, Printers, Bartholomew Close</p>

    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>
  </front>

<body>

<pb n="005"/><anchor id="Pg005"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<head>Advertisement.</head>

<p>
The Editor takes this opportunity of returning his
best acknowledgments to Sir <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">John Stoddart</hi>,
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">LL.D.</hi>, to the Rev.
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">James Gillman</hi>, Incumbent of Trinity,
Lambeth, and to <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Henry Lee</hi>, Esq.,
Assistant Surgeon to King's College Hospital, for their great kindness,
in regard to this publication.
</p>

<ab><hi rend='italic'>16, Norfolk Street, Park Lane.</hi></ab>

</div>

<pb n="006"/><anchor id="Pg006"/>

<pb n="007"/><anchor id="Pg007"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
The accompanying pages contain the unfinished
Sketch of a Theory of Life by S. T. Coleridge. Everything
that fell from the pen of that extraordinary man
bore latent, as well as more obvious indications of
genius, and of its inseparable concomitant&mdash;originality.
To this general remark the present Essay is far from
forming an exception. No one can peruse it, without
admiring the author's comprehensive research and profound
meditation; but at the same time, partly from the
exuberance of his imagination, and partly from an
apparent want of method (though, in truth, he had a
method of his own, by which he marshalled his thoughts
in an order perfectly intelligible to himself), a first
perusal will, to many readers, prove unsatisfactory,
unless they are prepared for it by an introduction of a
more popular character. This purpose, therefore, I
shall endeavour to accomplish; it being to be understood
that I by no means make myself responsible
either for Mr. Coleridge's speculations, or for the
manner in which they are enunciated; and that, on
the contrary, I shall occasionally indicate views from
which I dissent, and expressions which perhaps the
<pb n="008"/><anchor id="Pg008"/>
author himself, on revision, would have seen reason to
correct.
</p>

<p>
It is clear that Mr. Coleridge considers the unity of
human nature to result from two combined elements,
Body and Soul; that he regards the latter as the principle
of Reason and of Conscience (both which he has
largely treated in his published works), and that the
<q>Life,</q> which he here investigates, concerns, in relation
to mankind, only the Body. He is far, however,
from confining the term <q>Life</q> to its action on the
human body; on the contrary, he disclaims the division
of all that surrounds us into things with life, and
things without life; and contends, that the term Life is
no less applicable to the irreducible <emph>bases</emph> of chemistry,
such as sodium, potassium, &amp;c., or to the various forms
of crystals, or the geological strata which compose
the crust of our globe, than it is to the human body
itself, the acme and perfection of animal organization.
I admit that there are certain great powers, such as
magnetism, electricity, and chemistry, whose action
may be traced, even by the limited means which
science at present possesses, in admirable gradation,
from purely unorganized to the most highly organized
matter: and, I think, that Mr. Coleridge has done this
with great ingenuity and striking effect; but what I
object to is, that he applies to the combined operation
of these powers, in all cases, the term <emph>Life</emph>. If we
look back to the early history of language, we shall
probably find that this word, and its synonymes in
<pb n="009"/><anchor id="Pg009"/>
other tongues, were first employed to denote <emph>human</emph>
life, that is, the duration of a human being's existence
from birth to the grave. As this existence was marked
by actions, many of which were common to man with
other animals, those animals also were said to <q>live;</q>
but the extension of the notion of Life to the vegetable
creation is comparatively a recent usage,&mdash;and
hitherto (in this country at least) no writer before Mr.
Coleridge, so far as I know, has maintained that rocks
and mountains, nay, <q>the great globe itself,</q> share with
mankind the gift of Life. On the other hand, there
are well known and energetic uses of the word <q>Life,</q>
to which Mr. Coleridge's speculations, as contained in
the accompanying pages, are wholly inapplicable. Almost
all nations, even the most savage, agree in the
belief that individuals of the human race, after they
have ceased to exist in this mortal life, will exist in
another state, to which also the word Life is universally
applied; but to this latter Mr. Coleridge's
views of magnetism, electricity, &amp;c., can hardly be
thought applicable. Still less can they apply to <q>Life</q>
in its spiritual sense; as, when Moses says to the Jews,
<q>the words of the law are your <emph>life</emph>,</q> (Deut. xxxii, 47,)
and when our Saviour says, <q>the words that I speak
unto you, they are spirit, and they are <emph>life</emph>;</q> (John, vi,
63;) and again, <q>I am the resurrection and the life,</q>
(John, xi, 25.) Upon the whole, therefore, I think it
would have been advisable in Mr. Coleridge to have
adopted a different phraseology, in tracing the operation
<pb n="010"/><anchor id="Pg010"/>
of certain natural agencies first on unorganized,
and then on organized bodies.
</p>

<p>
Another word, of which I consider an improper use
to be made in this Essay, is <q>Nature.</q> I find this
imaginary being introduced on all occasions, and invested
with attributes of personality, which may be
extremely apt to make a false impression on young or
thoughtless minds. At one time, <q>the life of Nature</q>
is spoken of; then we are informed that <q>Nature has
succeeded. <emph>She</emph> has created the intermediate link between
the vegetable world and the animal.</q> Again,
it is said that <q>Nature seems to fall back, and to reexert
<emph>herself</emph> on the lower ground, which <emph>she</emph> had before
occupied;</q>&mdash;and elsewhere we are told that <q>Nature
never loses what <emph>she</emph> has once learnt; though in the
acquirement of each new power <emph>she</emph> intermits or performs
less energetically the act immediately preceding.
<emph>She</emph> often drops a faculty, but never fails to pick it up
again. <emph>She</emph> may seem forgetful and absent; but it is
only to recollect <emph>herself</emph> with additional as well as recruited
vigour in some after and higher state.</q> Now
the word <q>Nature,</q> in any intelligible sense, means
nothing but that method and order by which the
Almighty regulates the common course of things.
Nature is not a person; it is not active; it neither
creates nor performs actions more or less energetically,
nor learns, nor forgets, nor reexerts itself, nor recruits
its vigour. Perhaps it will be said that all this is
merely figurative language. Figurative language is
<pb n="011"/><anchor id="Pg011"/>
very much misplaced in strict philosophical investigations;
and these particular figures, which might be
quite consistent with the atheistical philosophy of
Lucretius, sound ill in the mouth of a pious Christian,
which Mr. Coleridge undoubtedly was. He probably
adopted them unconsciously from Bacon; but Bacon's
use of the word Nature ought rather to have served as
a warning than an example; for it has contributed, in
no small degree, to the atheistical philosophy of recent
times.
</p>

<p>
The prevalent natural philosophy of the present day
is that which is called <emph>corpuscular</emph>, because it assumes
the existence of a first matter, consisting of <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">corpuscula</foreign>
or atoms, which are supposed to be definite, though
extremely small, <emph>quantities</emph>, invested with the <emph>qualities</emph>
of extension, impenetrability, and the like; and from
certain combinations of these qualities, Life is considered,
by some persons, to be a necessary result.
This philosophy Mr. Coleridge combats. The supposed
atoms, he says, are mere abstractions of the mind; and
Life is not a thing, the result of atomic arrangement
or action, but is itself an act, or process. He refutes
various definitions of Life, such as, that it is the sum
of all the functions by which death is resisted; or, that
it depends on the faculty of nutrition, or of anti-putrescence.
His own definition he proposes merely
as an hypothesis. Life, he says, is <q>the principle of
Individuation,</q> that is to say, it is a power which
<pb n="012"/><anchor id="Pg012"/>
discloses itself from within, combining many qualities
into one individual thing. This individualising principle
unites, as he conceives, with the cooperating
action of magnetism, electricity, and chemistry. At
least, such is the inference to be drawn from the present
state of science; though it is easily conceivable that
future discoveries may bring us acquainted with powers
more directly connected with Life. The most general
law governing the action of Life, as a tendency to individuation,
is here designated <emph>polarity</emph>; for instance,
the power termed magnetism (not meaning that there
is necessarily an actual tangible magnet in the case)
has two poles, the negative, answering to attraction,
rest, carbon, &amp;c., and the positive, answering to repulsion,
mobility, azote, &amp;c.; and as the magnetic
needle which points to the north necessarily indicates
thereby the south, so the power disposing to rest has
necessarily a counteracting influence disposing to
mobility, between which lies the point of indifference.
Now this quality, to which Mr. Coleridge gives the
name of polarity, is in truth nothing more than an exemplification
of the doctrine of opposites, the
<foreign lang="el">πρός ἂλληλα ἀντικειμένω ἀντίθεσις</foreign>,
which the Eleatic Philosopher,
in Plato's <q>Sophist,</q> applies to the idea of
existence and non-existence, and which accompanies
every other idea as its shadow, whether in physics,
in intellect, or in morals; for the finite is opposed
to the infinite, the false to the true, the evil to the
<pb n="013"/><anchor id="Pg013"/>
good, and so forth; which we say, not to derogate
from the value of Mr. Coleridge's application of the
doctrine, of which he has very ably availed himself;
but merely to explain the term polarity, by referring it,
as a species, to a higher genus of intellectual conceptions.
</p>

<p>
Reverting to the three powers before mentioned, it is
not to be understood, that on Mr. Coleridge's hypothesis
of Life, they ever act separately; but in the different
modifications of Life, at one time the power of magnetism
predominates, at another that of electricity, and at
another that of chemistry. Magnetism is stated to act
as a line, electricity as a surface, and chemistry as a
solid; for all which Mr. Coleridge refers to certain
physical experiments. The predominance of magnetism
is characterised by reproduction, that of electricity by
irritability; and irritability, which first appears as
muscle, gradually rises into sensibility as nerve. The
limits of a mere introduction will not permit me to
examine Mr. Coleridge's first principles more in detail;
and I can but briefly notice their application to the
successive stages of ascent, from the first rudiments of
individualised Life, in the lowest classes of the mineral,
vegetable, and animal creation, to its crown and consummation
in the human body. Beginning with magnetism,
by which, in its widest sense, he means what
he improperly calls the first and simplest differential
act of <emph>Nature</emph> (he should rather have said the first and
simplest conception that we can form of a differential
<pb n="014"/><anchor id="Pg014"/>
act of God, in the work of creation), he supposes the
pre-existence of chaos, not, indeed, in the Miltonic
sense&mdash;
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend="pre">For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four champions fierce,</q></l>
<l>Strive <emph>there</emph> for mast'ry, and to battle bring</l>
<l><q rend="post">Their embryon atoms,&mdash;</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
but rather as one vast homogeneous fluid, and even
<emph>that</emph> he suggests not as a historical fact, but as the
appropriate symbol of a great fundamental truth. The
first effort of magnetic power, the first step from indifference
to difference, from formless homogeneity to
independent existence, is seen in the tranquil deposition
of crystals; and an increasing tendency to difference
is observable in the increasing multitude of strata, till
we come to organic life; of which the vegetable and
animal worlds may be regarded as opposite poles; carbon
prevailing in the former and azote in the latter;
and vegetation being characterised by the predominance
of magnetism in its highest power, as reproduction;
whilst the animal tribes evince the power of electricity,
as shown in irritability and sensibility. Passing over
the forms of vegetation, we come to the polypi, corallines,
&amp;c., in which individuality appears in its first
dawn; for a multitude of animals form, as it were, a
common animal, and different genera pass into each
other, almost indistinguishably. The tubipora of the
corals connects with the serpula of the conchylia. In
the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">mollusca</foreign>
the separation of organs becomes more
observable; in the higher species there are rudiments
<pb n="015"/><anchor id="Pg015"/>
of nerves, and an exponent, though scarcely distinguishable,
of sensibility. In the snail, and muscle, the separation
of the fluid from the solid is more marked, yet
the prevalence of the carbonic principle connects these
and the preceding classes, in a certain degree, with the
vegetable creation. <q>But the <emph>insect</emph> world, taken at
large (says Mr. Coleridge) appears as an intense <emph>Life</emph>,
that has struggled itself loose, and become emancipated
from vegetation&mdash;<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">Floræ liberti,
et libertini</foreign>!</q> In
insects we first find the distinct commencement of a
separation between the muscular system, that is, organs
of irritability, and the nervous system, that is, organs of
sensibility; the former, however, maintaining a pre-eminence
throughout, and the nerves themselves being
probably subservient to the motory power. With the
fishes begins an internal system of bones, but these are
the results of a comparatively imperfect formation, being
in general little more than mere gristle. In birds we
find a sort of synthesis of the powers of fish and insects.
In all three, the powers are under the predominance
of irritability; but sensibility, which is dormant in the
insect, begins to awaken in the fish, and, though still
subordinate, is quite awake in the bird, of which no
better proof can be given than its power of sound, with
the rudiments of modulation, in the large class of singing
birds, and in some others a tendency to acquire and
to imitate articulate speech. The next step of ascent
brings us to the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">mammalia</foreign>;
and in these, including
beasts and men, the complete and universal presence of
<pb n="016"/><anchor id="Pg016"/>
a nervous system raises sensibility to its due place and
rank among the animal powers. Finally, in Man the
whole force of organic power attains an inward and
centripetal direction, and the <q>apex of the living
pyramid</q>becomes a fit receptacle for Reason and Conscience.
</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>
It is much to be regretted, that the estimable
Author did not live to put a finishing hand to this
Essay; but the part completed involves speculations of
so interesting a nature, and presents such striking
marks of deep and original thought, that the Editor,
to whose hands it was committed, did not feel himself
justified in withholding it from the judgment of
the public.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="017"/><anchor id="Pg017"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Physiology Of Life.</head>
<head type="sub">Introduction.</head>

<p>
When we stand before the bust of John Hunter, or as
we enter the magnificent museum furnished by his labours,
and pass slowly, with meditative observation, through this
august temple, which the genius of one great man has
raised and dedicated to the wisdom and uniform working
of the Creator, we perceive at every step the guidance, we
had almost said, the inspiration, of those profound ideas
concerning Life, which dawn upon us, indeed, through his
written works, but which he has here presented to us in
a more perfect language than that of words&mdash;the language
of God himself, as uttered by Nature.
</p>

<p>
That the true idea of Life existed in the mind of John
Hunter I do not entertain the least doubt; but it may,
perhaps, be doubted whether his incessant occupation, and
his stupendous industry in the service, both of his contemporaries
<pb n="018"/><anchor id="Pg018"/>
and of posterity, added to his comparatively slight
acquaintance with the arts and aids of logical arrangement,
permitted him fully to unfold and arrange it in distinct,
clear, and communicable conceptions. Assuredly,
however, I may, without incurring the charge of arrogance
or detraction, venture to assert that, in his writings
the light which occasionally flashes upon us seems at
other times, and more frequently, to struggle through an
unfriendly medium, and even sometimes to suffer a temporary
occultation. At least, in order to dissipate the
undeniable obscurities, and to reconcile the apparent contradictions
found in his works,&mdash;to distinguish, in short,
the numerous passages in which without, perhaps, losing
sight internally of his own peculiar belief, he yet falls into
the phraseology and mechanical solutions of his age,&mdash;we
must distinguish such passages from those in which the
form corresponds to the substance, and in which, therefore,
the nature and essential laws of vital action are expressed,
as far as his researches had unveiled them to his
own mind, without disguise. To effect this, we must, as
it were, climb up on his shoulders, and look at the same
objects in a distincter form, because seen from the more
commanding point of view furnished by himself. This
has, indeed, been more than once attempted already, and,
in one instance, with so evident a display of power and
insight as announces in the assertor and vindicator of the
Hunterian Theory a congenial intellect, and a disciple in
<pb n="019"/><anchor id="Pg019"/>
whom Hunter himself would have exulted. Would that
this attempt had been made on a larger scale, that the
writer to whom I refer<note place="foot">Mr. Abernethy.</note>
had in consequence developed
his opinions systematically, and carried them yet further
back, even to their ultimate principle!
</p>

<p>
But this the scientific world has yet to expect; or it
is more than probable that the present humble endeavour
would have been superseded, or confined, at least, to the
task of restating the opinion of my predecessor with such
modifications as the differences that will always exist between
men who have thought independently, and each for
himself, have never failed to introduce, even on problems
of far easier and more obvious solution.
</p>

<p>
Without further preface or apology, therefore, I shall
state at once my objections to all the definitions that
have hitherto been given of Life, as meaning too much or
too little, with an exception, however, in favour of those
which mean nothing at all; and even these last must, in
certain cases, receive an honour they do not merit, and
be confuted, or rather detected, on account of their too
general acceptance, and the incalculable power of words
over the minds of men in proportion to the remoteness of
the subject from the cognizance of the senses.
</p>

<pb n="020"/><anchor id="Pg020"/>

<p>
It would be equally presumptuous and unreasonable
should I, with a late writer on this subject, <q>exhort the
reader to be particularly on his guard against loose and
indefinite expressions;</q> but I perfectly agree
that they are the bane of all science, and have been
remarkably injurious in the different departments of
physiology.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="021"/><anchor id="Pg021"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>The Nature Of Life.</head>
<head type="sub">On The Definitions Of Life Hitherto Received. Hints
Towards A More Comprehensive Theory.</head>

<p>
The attempts to explain the nature of Life, which have
fallen within my knowledge, presuppose the arbitrary
division of all that surrounds us into things with life, and
things without life&mdash;a division grounded on a mere assumption.
At the best, it can be regarded only as a
hasty deduction from the first superficial notices of the
objects that surround us, sufficient, perhaps, for the purpose
of ordinary discrimination, but far too indeterminate
and diffluent to be taken unexamined by the philosophic
inquirer. The positions of science must be tried in the
jeweller's scales, not like the mixed commodities of the
market, on the weigh-bridge of common opinion and
vulgar usage. Such, however, has been the procedure in
the present instance, and the result has been answerable
to the coarseness of the process. By a comprisal of the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">petitio principii</foreign> with the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">argumentum in circulo</foreign>,&mdash;in
plain English, by an easy logic, which begins with begging the
question, and then moving in a circle, comes round to the
point where it began,&mdash;each of the two divisions has been
made to define the other by a mere reassertion of their
assumed contrariety. The physiologist has luminously
explained <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Y</hi> plus
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">X</hi> by informing us that it is a somewhat
that is the antithesis of <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Y</hi> minus
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">X</hi>; and if we ask, what
<pb n="022"/><anchor id="Pg022"/>
then is <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Y-X</hi>?
the answer is, the antithesis of <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Y+X</hi>,&mdash;a
reciprocation of great service, that may remind us of
the twin sisters in the fable of the Lamiæ, with but one
eye between them both, which each borrowed from the
other as either happened to want it; but with this additional
disadvantage, that in the present case it is after
all but an eye of glass. The definitions themselves will
best illustrate our meaning. I will begin with that
given by Bichat. <q>Life is the sum of all the functions
by which death is resisted,</q> in which I have in vain
endeavoured to discover any other meaning than that life
consists in being able to live. This author, with a
whimsical gravity, prefaces his definition with the remark,
that the nature of life has hitherto been sought for in
<emph>abstract</emph> considerations; as if it were possible that four
more inveterate abstractions could be brought together
in one sentence than are here assembled in the words,
life, death, function, and resistance. Similar instances
might be cited from Richerand and others. The word
Life is translated into other more learned words; and this
<emph>paraphrase</emph> of the <emph>term</emph> is substituted for the
<emph>definition</emph> of the <emph>thing</emph>, and therefore (as is always the
case in every <emph>real</emph> definition as contra-distinguished from a
<emph>verbal</emph> definition,) for at least a partial
<emph>solution</emph> of the <emph>fact</emph>. Such
as these form the <emph>first</emph> class.&mdash;The second class takes some
one particular function of Life common to all living objects,&mdash;nutrition,
for instance; or, to adopt the phrase most in
vogue at present, assimilation, for the purposes of reproduction
and growth. Now this, it is evident, can be an
appropriate definition only of the very lowest species, as of a
Fungus or a Mollusca; and just as comprehensive an idea
<pb n="023"/><anchor id="Pg023"/>
of the mystery of Life, as a Mollusca might give, can this
definition afford. But this is not the only objection.
For, <emph>first</emph>, it is not pretended that we begin with seeking
for an organ evidently appropriated to nutrition, and then
infer that the substance in which such an organ is found
<emph>lives</emph>. On the contrary, in a number of cases among the
obscurer animals and vegetables we infer the organ from
the pre-established fact of its life. <emph>Secondly</emph>, it identifies
the process itself with a certain range of its forms, those,
namely, by which it is manifested in animals and vegetables.
For this, too, no less than the former, presupposes
the arbitrary division of all things into not living and
lifeless, on which, as I before observed, all these definitions
are grounded. But it is sorry logic to take the
proof of an affirmative in one thing as the proof of the
negative in another. All animals that have lungs breathe,
but it would be a childish oversight to deduce the converse,
viz. all animals that breathe have lungs. The
theory in which the French chemists organized the discoveries
of Black, Cavendish, Priestly, Scheele, and other
English and German philosophers, is still, indeed, the
reigning theory, but rather, it should seem, from the
absence of a rival sufficiently popular to fill the throne
in its stead, than from the continuance of an implicit
belief in its own stability. We no longer at least cherish
that intensity of faith which, before Davy commenced his
brilliant career, had not only identified it with chemistry
itself, but had substituted its nomenclature, even in
common conversation, for the far more philosophic language
which the human race had abstracted from the laboratory
of Nature. I may venture to prophecy that no future
<pb n="024"/><anchor id="Pg024"/>
Beddoes will make it the corival of the mathematical
sciences in demonstrative evidence. I think it a matter
of doubt whether, during the period of its supposed
infallibility, physiology derived more benefit from the
extension, or injury from the misdirection, of its views.
Enough of the latter is fresh in recollection to make it
but an equivocal compliment to a physiological position,
that it must stand or fall with the corpuscular philosophy,
as modified by the French theory of chemistry. Yet
should it happen (and the event is not impossible, nor the
supposition altogether absurd,) that more and more decisive
facts should present themselves in confirmation of
the metamorphosis of elements, the position that life consists
in assimilation would either cease to be distinctive,
or fall back into the former class as an identical proposition,
namely, that Life, meaning by the word that sort
of growth which takes place by means of a peculiar organization,
consists in that sort of growth which is peculiar
to organized life. <emph>Thirdly</emph>, the definition involves a still
more egregious flaw in the reasoning, namely, that of
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">cum hoc, ergo propter hoc</foreign>
(or the assumption of causation
from mere coexistence); and this, too, in its very worst
form. For it is not <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">cum hoc solo, ergo
propter hoc</foreign>, which would in many cases supply a presumptive proof by induction,
but <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">cum hoc, et plurimis aliis, ergo
propter hoc</foreign>! Shell, of some kind or other, is common to the whole order
of testacea, but it would be absurd to define the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">vis vitæ</foreign>
of testaceous animals as existing in the shell, though we
know it to be the constant accompaniment, and have
every reason to believe the constant effect, of the specific
life that acts in those animals. Were we
(<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">argumenti
<pb n="025"/><anchor id="Pg025"/>
causá</foreign>) to imagine shell coextensive with the organized
creation, this would produce no abatement in the falsity
of the reasoning. Nor does the flaw stop here; for a
physiological, that is a real, definition, as distinguished
from the verbal definitions of lexicography, must consist
neither in any single property or function of the thing
to be defined, nor yet in all collectively, which latter,
indeed, would be a history, not a definition. It must
consist, therefore, in the <emph>law</emph> of the thing, or in such an
<emph>idea</emph> of it, as, being admitted, all the properties and functions
are admitted by implication. It must likewise be
so far <emph>causal</emph>, that a full insight having been obtained
of the law, we derive from it a progressive insight into
the necessity and <emph>generation</emph> of the phenomena of which
it is the law. Suppose a disease in question, which appeared
always accompanied with certain symptoms in
certain stages, and with some one or more symptoms in
all stages&mdash;say deranged digestion, capricious alternation
of vivacity and languor, headache, dilated pupil, diminished
sensibility to light, &amp;c.&mdash;Neither the man who selected
the one constant symptom, nor he who enumerated all
the symptoms, would give the scientific definition <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">talem scilicet, quali scientia fit vel datur</foreign>,
but the man who at once named and defined the disease hydrocephalus, producing
pressure on the brain. For it is the essence
of a scientific definition to be causative, not by introduction
of imaginary somewhats, natural or supernatural
under the name of causes, but by announcing
the law of action in the particular case, in subordination
to the common law of which all the phenomena are modifications
or results.
</p>

<pb n="026"/><anchor id="Pg026"/>

<p>
Now in the definition on which, as the representative
of a whole class, we are <emph>now</emph> animadverting, a single effect
is given as constituting the cause. For nutrition by digestion
is certainly necessary to life, only under certain
circumstances, but that life is previously necessary to
digestion is absolutely certain under all circumstances.
Besides, what other phenomenon of Life would the conception
of assimilation, <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">per se</foreign>,
or as it exists in the lowest order of animals, involve or explain? How, for instance,
does it include sensation, locomotion, or habit? or if the
two former should be taken as distinct from life, <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">toto genere</foreign>, and supervenient to it, we then ask
what conception is given of <emph>vital</emph> assimilation as contradistinguished
from that of the nucleus of a crystal?
</p>

<p>
<emph>Lastly</emph>, this definition confounds the Law of Life, or
the primary and universal form of vital agency, with the
conception, Animals. For the kind, it substitutes the
representative of its degrees and modifications. But the
first and most important office of science, physical or
physiological, is to contemplate the power in kind, abstracted
from the degree. The ideas of caloric, whether
as substance or property, and the conceptions of latent
heat, the heat in ice, &amp;c., that excite the wonder or the
laughter of the vulgar, though susceptible of the most important
practical applications, are the result of this abstraction;
while the only purpose to which a definition
like the preceding could become subservient, would be in
supplying a nomenclature with the character of the most
common species of a genus&mdash;its <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">genus generalissimum</foreign>, and
even this would be useless in the present instance, inasmuch
as it presupposes the knowledge of the things characterised.
</p>

<pb n="027"/><anchor id="Pg027"/>

<p>
The third class, and far superior to the two former,
selects some property characteristic of all living bodies,
not merely found in all <emph>animals</emph> alike, but existing equally
in all parts of all living things, both animals and plants.
Such, for instance, is the definition of Life, as consisting
in anti-putrescence, or the power of resisting putrefaction.
Like all the others, however, even this confines the idea
of Life to those degrees or concentrations of it, which
manifest themselves in organized beings, or rather in those
the organization of which is apparent to us. Consequently,
it substitutes an abstract term, or generalization of effects,
for the idea, or superior form of causative agency. At
best, it describes the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">vis vitá</foreign>
by one only of its many influences.
It is however, as we have said before, preferable
to the former, because it is not, as they are, altogether
unfruitful, inasmuch as it attests, less equivocally than
any other sign, the presence or absence of that degree of
the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">vis vitá</foreign>
which is the necessary condition of organic or
self-renewing power. It throws no light, however, on the
law or principle of action; it does not increase our insight
into the other phenomena; it presents to us no <emph>inclusive</emph>
form, out of which the other forms may be developed, and
finally, its defect as a definition may be detected by generalizing
it into a higher formula, as a power which, during
its continuance, resists or subordinates heterogeneous and
adverse powers. Now this holds equally true of chemical
relatively to the mechanical powers; and really affirms
no more of Life than may be equally affirmed of every
form of being, namely, that it tends to preserve itself,
and resists, to a certain extent, whatever is incompatible
with the laws that constitute its particular state for the
<pb n="028"/><anchor id="Pg028"/>
time being. For it is not true only of the great divisions
or classes into which we have found it expedient to distinguish,
while we generalize, the powers acting in nature,
as into intellectual, vital, chemical, mechanical; but it
holds equally true of the degrees, or species of each of
these genera relatively to each other: as in the decomposition
of the alkalies by heat, or the galvanic spark.
Like the combining power of Life, the copula here resists
for awhile the attempts to dissolve it, and then yields, to
reappear in new phenomena.
</p>

<p>
It is a wonderful property of the human mind, that
when once a momentum has been given to it in a fresh
direction, it pursues the new path with obstinate perseverance,
in all conceivable bearings, to its utmost extremes.
And by the startling consequences which arise out of these
extremes, it is first awakened to its error, and either recalled
to some former track, or receives some fresh impulse,
which it follows with the same eagerness, and admits to
the same monopoly. Thus in the 13th century the first
science which roused the intellects of men from the torpor
of barbarism, was, as in all countries ever has been, and
ever must be the case, the science of <emph>Metaphysics</emph> and
<emph>Ontology</emph>. We first seek what can be found at home, and
what wonder if truths, that appeared to reveal the secret
depths of our own souls, should take possession of the whole
mind, and all truths appear trivial which could not either
be evolved out of similar principles, by the same process,
or at least brought under the same forms of thought, by
perceived or imagined analogies? And so it was. For
more than a century men continued to invoke the oracle
of their own spirits, not only concerning its own forms
<pb n="029"/><anchor id="Pg029"/>
and modes of being, but likewise concerning the laws of
external nature. All attempts at philosophical explication
were commenced by a mere effort of the understanding,
as the power of abstraction; or by the imagination, transferring
its own experiences to every object presented from
without. By the former, a class of phenomena were in
the first place abstracted, and fixed in some general term:
of course this could designate only the impressions made
by the outward objects, and so far, therefore, having been
thus metamorphosed, they were effects of these objects;
but then made to supply the place of their own causes,
under the name of occult qualities. Thus the properties
peculiar to gold, were abstracted from those it possessed
in common with other bodies, and then generalized in the
term <emph>Aureity</emph>: and the inquirer was instructed that the
Essence of Gold, or the cause which constituted the peculiar
modification of matter called gold, was the power
of aureity. By the latter, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> by the imagination, thought
and will were superadded to the occult quality, and every
form of nature had its appropriate Spirit, to be controlled
or conciliated by an appropriate ceremonial. This was
entitled its <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">SUBSTANTIAL FORM</hi>.
Thus, physic became a
sort of dull poetry, and the art of medicine (for physiology
could scarcely be said to exist) was a system of magic,
blended with traditional empiricism. Thus the forms of
thought proceeded to act in their own emptiness, with no
attempt to fill or substantiate them by the information of
the senses, and all the branches of science formed so
many sections of logic and metaphysics. And so it continued,
even to the time that the Reformation sounded
the second trumpet, and the authority of the schools sank
<pb n="030"/><anchor id="Pg030"/>
with that of the hierarchy, under the intellectual courage
and activity which this great revolution had inspired.
Power, once awakened, cannot rest in one object. All
the sciences partook of the new influences. The world of
experimental philosophy was soon mapped out for posterity
by the comprehensive and enterprising genius of Bacon,
and the laws explained by which experiment could be
dignified into experience.<note place="foot">Experiment, as an organ of reason, not
less distinguished from the blind or dreaming industry of the alchemists, than it
was successfully opposed to the barren subtleties of the schoolmen.</note>
But no sooner was the impulse
given, than the same propensity was made manifest
of looking at all things in the one point of view which
chanced to be of predominant attraction. Our Gilbert,
a man of genuine philosophical genius, had no sooner
multiplied the facts of magnetism, and extended our
knowledge concerning the property of magnetic bodies,
but all things in heaven, and earth, and in the waters
beneath the earth, were resolved into magnetic influences.
</p>

<p>
Shortly after a new light was struck by Harriott
and Descartes, with their contemporaries, or immediate
predecessors, and the restoration of ancient geometry,
aided by the modern invention of algebra, placed the
science of mechanism on the philosophic throne. How
widely this domination spread, and how long it continued,
if, indeed, even now it can be said to have abdicated its
pretensions, the reader need not be reminded. The sublime
discoveries of Newton, and, together with these, his
not less fruitful than wonderful application, of the higher
mathesis to the movements of the celestial bodies, and to
the laws of light, gave almost a religious sanction to the
<pb n="031"/><anchor id="Pg031"/>
corpuscular system and mechanical theory. It became
synonymous with philosophy itself. It was the sole portal
at which truth was permitted to enter. The human body
was treated of as an hydraulic machine, the operations of
medicine were solved, and alas! even directed by reference
partly to gravitation and the laws of motion, and partly
by chemistry, which itself, however, as far as its theory
was concerned, was but a branch of mechanics working
exclusively by imaginary wedges, angles, and spheres.
Should the reader chance to put his hand on the <q>Principles
of Philosophy,</q> by La Forge, an immediate disciple
of Descartes, he may see the phenomena of sleep solved
in a copper-plate engraving, with all the figures into
which the globules of the blood shaped themselves, and
the results demonstrated by mathematical calculations.
In short, from the time of Kepler<note place="foot">Whose own mind, however, was not
comprehended in the vortex; where Kepler erred it was in the other extreme.</note>
to that of Newton, and
from Newton to Hartley, not only all things in external
nature, but the subtlest mysteries of life and organization,
and even of the intellect and moral being, were conjured
within the magic circle of mathematical formulæ. And
now a new light was struck by the discovery of electricity,
and, in every sense of the word, both playful and serious,
both for good and for evil, it may be affirmed to have
electrified the whole frame of natural philosophy. Close
on its heels followed the momentous discovery of the
principal gases by Scheele and Priestly, the composition of
water by Cavendish, and the doctrine of latent heat by
Black. The scientific world was prepared for a new
dynasty; accordingly, as soon as Lavoisier had reduced
<pb n="032"/><anchor id="Pg032"/>
the infinite variety of chemical phenomena to the actions,
reactions, and interchanges of a few elementary substances,
or at least excited the expectation that this would speedily
be effected, the hope shot up, almost instantly, into full
faith, that it had been effected. Henceforward the new
path, thus brilliantly opened, became the common road
to all departments of knowledge: and, to this moment, it
has been pursued with an eagerness and almost epidemic
enthusiasm which, scarcely less than its political revolutions,
characterise the spirit of the age. Many and inauspicious
have been the invasions and inroads of this new
conqueror into the rightful territories of other sciences;
and strange alterations have been made in less harmless
points than those of terminology, in homage to an art
unsettled, in the very ferment of imperfect discoveries, and
either without a theory, or with a theory maintained only
by composition and compromise. Yet this very circumstance
has favoured its encroachments, by the gratifications
which its novelty affords to our curiosity, and by the
keener interest and higher excitement which an unsettled
and revolutionary state is sure to inspire. He who supposes
that science possesses an immunity from such influences
knows little of human nature. How, otherwise,
could men of strong minds and sound judgments have
attempted to penetrate by the clue of chemical experiment
the secret recesses, the sacred adyta of organic life,
without being aware that chemistry must needs be at its
extreme limits, when it has approached the threshold of
a higher power? Its own transgressions, however, and
the failure of its enterprises will become the means of
defining its absolute boundary, and we shall have to guard
<pb n="033"/><anchor id="Pg033"/>
against the opposite error of rejecting its aid altogether
as analogy, because we have repelled its ambitious claims
to an identity with the vital powers.
</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>
Previously to the submitting my own ideas on the subject
of life, and the powers into which it resolves itself, or
rather in which it is manifested to us, I have hazarded
this apparent digression from the anxiety to <emph>preclude certain
suspicions</emph>, which the subject itself is so fitted to
awaken, and while I anticipate the charges, to plead in
answer to each a full and unequivocal&mdash;not guilty!
</p>

<p>
In the first place, therefore, I distinctly disclaim all
intention of explaining life into an occult quality; and
retort the charge on those who can satisfy themselves
with defining it as the peculiar power by which death is
resisted.
</p>

<p>
Secondly. Convinced&mdash;by revelation, by the consenting
authority of all countries, and of all ages, by the imperative
voice of my own conscience, and by that wide chasm
between man and the noblest animals of the brute
creation, which no perceivable or conceivable difference
of organization is sufficient to overbridge&mdash;that I have a
rational and responsible soul, I think far too reverentially
of the same to degrade it into an hypothesis, and
cannot be blind to the contradiction I must incur, if I
assign that soul which I believe to constitute the peculiar
nature of man as the cause of functions and properties,
which man possesses in common with the oyster and the
mushroom.<note place="foot">But still less would I avail myself of its acknowledged
inappropriateness to the purposes of physiology, in order to cast a self-complacent
sneer on the soul itself, and on all who believe in its existence. First, because
in my opinion it would be impertinent; secondly, because it would be imprudent and
injurious to the character of my profession; and, lastly, because it would
argue an irreverence to the feelings of mankind, which I deem scarcely compatible
with a good heart, and a degree of arrogance and presumption which
I have never found, except in company with a corrupt taste and a shallow
capacity.</note>
</p>

<pb n="034"/><anchor id="Pg034"/>

<p>
Thirdly, while I disclaim the error of Stahl in deriving
the phenomena of life from the unconscious actions
of the rational soul, I repel with still greater earnestness
the assertion and even the supposition that the functions
are the offspring of the structure, and <q>Life<note place="foot">Vide Lawrence's
Lecture.</note> the result of organization,</q> connected with it as effect with cause.
Nay, the position seems to me little less strange, than
as if a man should say, that building with all the included
handicraft, of plastering, sawing, planing, &amp;c. were the
offspring of the house; and that the mason and carpenter
were the result of a suite of chambers, with the passages
and staircases that lead to them. To make <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A</hi>
the offspring of <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">B</hi>, when the very existence of
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">B</hi> as <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">B</hi>
presupposes the existence of <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A</hi>, is
preposterous in the <emph>literal</emph> sense of the word, and a consummate instance of
the <foreign lang="el" rend="font-style: italic">hysteron proteron</foreign>
in logic. But if I reject the organ as the cause of
that, of which it is the organ, though I might admit it
among the <emph>conditions</emph> of its actual functions; for the same
reason, I must reject <emph>fluids</emph> and <emph>ethers</emph> of all kinds,
magnetical, electrical, and universal, to whatever quintessential
thinness they may be treble distilled, and (as it
were) super-substantiated. With these, I abjure likewise
all <emph>chemical</emph> agencies, compositions, and decompositions,
were it only that as stimulants they suppose a
stimulability <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">sui generis</foreign>,
which is but another paraphrase
<pb n="035"/><anchor id="Pg035"/>
for life. Or if they are themselves at once both the excitant
and the excitability, I miss the connecting link between
this imaginary ether and the visible body, which then
becomes no otherwise distinguished from inanimate matter,
than by its juxtaposition in mere space, with an heterogeneous
inmate, the cycle of whose actions revolves within
itself. Besides which I should think that I was confounding
metaphors and realities most absurdly, if I imagined that I
had a greater insight into the meaning and possibility of a
living alcohol, than of a living quicksilver. In short, visible
<emph>surface</emph> and <emph>power</emph> of any kind,
much more the <emph>power</emph> of
life, are ideas which the very forms of the human understanding
make it impossible to identify. But whether
the powers which manifest themselves to us under certain
conditions in the forms of electricity, or chemical attraction,
have any analogy to the power which manifests
itself in growth and organization, is altogether a different
question, and demands altogether a different chain of
reasoning: if it be indeed a tree of knowledge, it will be
known by its fruits, and these will depends not on the
mere assertion, but on the inductions by which the position
is supported, and by the additions which it makes to our
insight into the nature of the facts it is meant to illustrate.
</p>

<p>
To <emph>account</emph> for Life is one thing; to explain Life another.
In the first we are supposed to state something prior (if
not in time, yet in the order of Nature) to the thing
accounted for, as the ground or cause of that thing, or
(which comprises the meaning and force of both words)
as its <emph>sufficient cause, quae et facit, et subest</emph>. And to
this, in the question of Life, I know no possible answer,
but GOD. To account for a thing is to see into the
<pb n="036"/><anchor id="Pg036"/>
principle of its possibility, and from that principle to
evolve its being. Thus the mathematician demonstrates
the truths of geometry by constructing them. It is an
admirable remark of Joh. Bapt. a Vico, in a Tract published
at Naples, 1710,<note place="foot">Joh. Bapt. a Vico, Neapol. Reg. eloq.
Professor, de antiquissima Itallorum sapientia ex lingua Latina originibus aruendâ:
libri tres. Neap., 1710.</note>
<q>Geometrica ideò demonstramus,
quia facimus; physica si demonstrare possimus, faceremus.
Metaphysici veri claritas eadem ac lucis, quam non nisi
per opaca cognoscimus; nam non lucem sed lucidas res
videmus. Physica sunt opaca, nempe formata et finita, in
quibus Metaphysici veri lumen videmus.</q> The reasoner
who assigns structure or organization as the antecedent
of Life, who names the former a cause, and the <emph>latter</emph> its
effect, <emph>he</emph> it is who pretends to account for life. Now
Euclid would, with great right, demand of such a philosopher
to <emph>make</emph> Life; in the same sense, I mean, in which
Euclid makes an Icosahedron, or a figure of twenty sides,
namely, in the understanding or by an intellectual construction.
An argument which, of itself, is sufficient to
prove the untenable nature of Materialism.
</p>

<p>
To explain a power, on the other hand, is (the power
itself being assumed, though not comprehended,
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ut qui datur, non intelligitur</foreign>)
to unfold or spread it out: <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ex implicito
planum facere</foreign>. In the present instance, such an
explanation would consist in the reduction of the idea of
Life to its simplest and most comprehensive form or mode
of action; that is, to some characteristic <emph>instinct</emph> or
<emph>tendency</emph>, evident in all its manifestations, and involved in
the idea itself. This assumed as existing in <emph>kind</emph>, it will
be required to present an ascending series of corresponding
<pb n="037"/><anchor id="Pg037"/>
phenomena as involved <emph>in</emph>, proceeding <emph>from</emph>, and so far
therefore explained <emph>by</emph>, the supposition of its progressive
intensity and of the gradual enlargement of its sphere,
the necessity of which again must be contained in the
idea of the tendency itself. In other words, the tendency
having been given in <emph>kind</emph>, it is required to render the
phenomena intelligible as its different degrees and modifications.
Still more perfect will the explanation be, should
the necessity of this progression and of these ascending
gradations be contained in the assumed idea of life, as
thus defined by the general form and common purport of
all its various tendencies. This done, we have only to
add the conditions common to all its phenomena, and, those
appropriate to each place and rank, in the scale of ascent,
and then proceed to determine the primary and constitutive
forms, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the elementary powers in which this
tendency realizes itself under different degrees and conditions.<note
place="foot"><p>The object I have proposed to myself, and wherein its distinction
exists, may be thus illustrated. A complex machine is presented to the common
view, the moving power of which is hidden. Of those who are studying
and examining it, one man fixes his attention on some one application of that
power, on certain effects produced by that particular application, and on a
certain part of the structure evidently appropriated to the production of these
effects, neither the one or other of which he had discovered in a neighbouring
machine, which he at the same time asserts to be quite distinct from the
former, and to be moved by a power altogether different, though many of the
works and operations are, he admits, common to both machines. In this supposed
peculiarity he places the essential character of the former machine, and
defines it by the presence of that which is, or which he supposes to be, absent
in the latter. Supposing that a stranger to both were about to visit the two
machines, this peculiarity would be so far useful as that it might enable him
to distinguish the one from the other, and thus to look in the proper place for
whatever else he had heard remarkable concerning either; not that he or his
informant would understand the machine any better or otherwise, than the
common character of a whole class in the nomenclature of botany would
enable a person to understand all, or any one of the plants contained in that
class. But if, on the other hand, the machine in question were such as no
man was a stranger to, if even the supposed peculiarity, either by its effects,
or by the construction of that portion of the works which produced them, were
equally well known to all men, in this case we can conceive no use at all of such
a definition; for at the best it could only be admitted as a definition for the
purposes of nomenclature, which never adds to knowledge, although it may
often facilitate its communication. But in this instance it would be nomenclature
misplaced, and without an object. Such appears to me to be the case
with all those definitions which place the essence of Life in nutrition, contractility,
&amp;c. As the second instance, I will take the inventor and maker
of the machine himself, who knows its moving power, or perhaps himself constitutes
it, who is, as it were, the soul of the work, and in whose mind all its
parts, with all their bearings and relations, had pre-existed long before the
machine itself had been put together. In him therefore there would reside,
what it would be presumption to attempt to acquire, or to pretend to communicate,
the most perfect insight not only of the machine itself, and of all
its various operations, but of its ultimate principle and its essential causes.
The mysterious ground, the efficient causes of vitality, and whether different
lives differ absolutely or only in degree, He alone can know who not only said,
<q>Let the earth bring forth the living creature, the beast of the earth after his
kind, and it was so;</q> but who said, <q>Let us make man in our image, who
himself breathed into his nostrils the breath of Life, and man became a living
soul.</q>
</p>
<p>
The third case which I would apply to my own attempt would be that of
the inquirer, who, presuming to know nothing of the power that moves the
whole machine, takes those parts of it which are presented to his view, seeks
to reduce its various movements to as few and simple laws of motion as
possible, and out of their separate and conjoint action proceeds to explain and
appropriate the structure and relative positions of the works. In obedience
to the canon,&mdash;<q>Principia non esse multiplicanda præter summam necessitatem
cui suffragamur non ideo quia causalem in mundo unitatem vel ratione vel experientiâ
perspiciamus, sed illam ipsam indagamus impulsu intellectûs, qui
tantundem sibi in explicatione phænomenorum profecisse videtur quantum ab
codem principio ad plurima rationata descendere ipsi concessum est.</q></p></note>
</p>

<pb n="038"/><anchor id="Pg038"/>

<p>
What is Life? Were such a question proposed, we should
be tempted to answer, what is <emph>not</emph> Life that really <emph>is</emph>?
Our reason convinces us that the quantities of things,
taken abstractedly as quantity, exist only in the relations
they bear to the percipient; in plainer words, they exist
<pb n="039"/><anchor id="Pg039"/>
only in our minds, <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ut
quorum esse est percipi</foreign>. For if the
definite quantities have a ground, and therefore a reality,
in the external world, and independent of the mind that
perceives them, this ground is <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">ipso facto</foreign> a quality; the
very etymon of this world showing that a quality, not
taken in its own nature but in relation to another thing,
is to be defined <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">causa
sufficiens, entia, de quibus loquimur;
esse talia, qualia sunt</foreign>. Either the quantities perceived
exist only in the perception, or they have likewise a real
existence. In the former case, the quality (the word is
here used in an active sense) that determines them belongs
to Life, <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">per ipsam
hypothesin</foreign>; and in the other case,
since by the agreement of all parties Life may exist in
other forms than those of consciousness, or even of sensibility,
the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">onus probandi</foreign>
falls on those who assert of any
quality that it is <emph>not</emph> Life. For the analogy of all that we
know is clearly in favour of the contrary supposition, and
if a man would analyse the meaning of his own words, and
carefully distinguish his perceptions and sensations from
the external cause exciting them, and at the same time
from the quantity or superficies under which that cause is
acting, he would instantly find himself, if we mistake not,
involuntarily identifying the ideas of Quality and Life.
Life, it is admitted on all hands, does not necessarily imply
consciousness or sensibility; and we, for our parts, cannot
see that the irritability which metals manifest to galvanism,
can be more remote from that which may be supposed to
exist in the tribe of lichens, or in the helvellæ, pezizee, &amp;c.,
than the latter is from the phenomena of excitability in
the human body, whatever name it may be called by, or in
<pb n="040"/><anchor id="Pg040"/>
whatever way it may modify itself.<note place="foot">The arborescent
forms on a frosty morning, to be seen on the window and pavement, must
have <emph>some</emph> relation to the more perfect forms developed
in the vegetable world.</note> That the mere act of
growth does not constitute the idea of Life, or the absence
of that act exclude it, we have a proof in every egg before it
is placed under the hen, and in every grain of corn before
it is put into the soil. All that could be deduced by fair
reasoning would amount to this only, that the life of
metals, as the power which effects and determines their
comparative cohesion, ductility, &amp;c., was yet lower on the
scale than the Life which produces the first attempts of
organization, in the almost shapeless tremella, or in such
fungi as grow in the dark recesses of the mine.
</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>
If it were asked, to what purpose or with what view we
should generalize the idea of Life thus broadly, I should
not hesitate to reply that, were there no other use conceivable,
there would be <emph>some</emph> advantage in merely destroying
an arbitrary assumption in natural philosophy,
and in reminding the physiologists that they could not
hear the life of metals asserted with a more contemptuous
surprise than they themselves incur from the vulgar, when
they speak of the Life in mould or mucor. But this is
not the case. This wider view not only precludes a groundless
assumption, it likewise fills up the arbitrary chasm
between physics and physiology, and justifies us in using
the former as means of insight into the latter, which would
be contrary to all sound rules of ratiocination if the powers
working in the objects of the two sciences were absolutely
<pb n="041"/><anchor id="Pg041"/>
and essentially diverse. For as to abstract the idea of
<emph>kind</emph> from that of <emph>degrees</emph>, which are alone designated in
the language of common use, is the first and indispensable
step in philosophy, so are we the better enabled to form
a notion of the <emph>kind</emph>, the lower the <emph>degree</emph>, and the simpler
the form is in which it appears to us. We study the complex
in the simple; and only from the intuition of the
lower can we safely proceed to the intellection of the
higher degrees. The only danger lies in the leaping from
low to high, with the neglect of the intervening gradations.
But the same error would introduce discord into the gamut,
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">et ab abusu contra usum non
valet consequentia</foreign>. That these
degrees will themselves bring forth secondary kinds sufficiently
distinct for all the purposes of science, and even
for common sense, will be seen in the course of this inquisition:
for this is one proof of the essential vitality
of nature, that she does not ascend as links in a suspended
chain, but as the steps in a ladder; or rather she at one
and the same time <emph>ascends</emph> as by a climax, and expands
as the concentric circles on the lake from the point to
which the stone in its fall had given the first impulse.
At all events, a contemptuous rejection of this mode of
reasoning would come with an ill grace from a medical
philosopher, who cannot combine any three phenomena
of health or of disease without the assumption of powers,
which he is compelled to deduce without being able to
demonstrate; nay, even of material substances as the
<emph>vehicles</emph> of these powers, which he can never expect to exhibit
before the senses.
</p>

<p>
From the preceding it should appear, that the most
comprehensive formula to which life is reducible, would
<pb n="042"/><anchor id="Pg042"/>
be that of the internal copula of bodies, or (if we may
venture to borrow a phrase from the Platonic school) the
<emph>power</emph> which discloses itself from within as a principle of
<emph>unity</emph> in the <emph>many</emph>. But that there is a physiognomy in
words, which, without reference to their fitness or necessity,
make unfavorable as well as favorable impressions,
and that every unusual term in an abstruse research
incurs the risk of being denominated jargon, I should at
the same time have borrowed a scholastic <emph>term</emph>, and defined
life <emph>absolutely</emph>, as the principle of unity in <emph>multeity</emph>, as far
as the former, the unity to wit, is produced <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">ab intra</foreign>; but
<emph>eminently</emph> (<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">sensu
eminenti</foreign>), I define life as <emph>the principle
of individuation</emph>, or the power which unites a given <emph>all</emph>
into a <emph>whole</emph> that is presupposed by all its parts. The
link that combines the two, and acts throughout both,
will, of course, be defined by the <emph>tendency</emph> to <emph>individuation</emph>.
Thus, from its utmost <emph>latency</emph>, in which life is one with
the elementary powers of mechanism, that is, with the
powers of mechanism considered as qualitative and actually
synthetic, to its highest manifestation, (in which, as
the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">vis vitæ vivida</foreign>,
or life <emph>as</emph> life, it subordinates and
modifies these powers, becoming contra-distinguished from
mechanism,<note place="foot">Thus we may say that whatever
is organized from without, is a product of mechanism; whatever is mechanised
from within, is a production of organization.</note> <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">ab extra</foreign>, under the form of organization,)
there is an ascending series of intermediate classes, and of
analogous gradations in each class. To a reflecting mind,
indeed, the very fact that the powers peculiar to life in
living animals <emph>include</emph> cohesion, elasticity, &amp;c. (or, in the
words of a late publication, <q>that living matter exhibits
<pb n="043"/><anchor id="Pg043"/>
these physical properties,</q><note place="foot"><q>The matter
that surrounds us is divided into two great classes, living
and dead; the latter is governed by physical laws, such as attraction, gravitation,
chemical affinity; and it exhibits physical properties, such as cohesion,
elasticity, divisibility, &amp;c. Living matter also exhibits these properties, and
is subject, in great measure, to physical laws. But living bodies are endowed
moreover with a set of properties altogether different from these, and contrasting
with them very remarkably.</q> (Vide Lawrence's Lectures, p. 121.)</note>)
would demonstrate that, in the
truth of things, they are homogeneous, and that both the
classes are but degrees and different dignities of one and
the same tendency. For the latter are not subjected to
the former as a lever, or walking-stick to the muscles;
the more intense the life is, the less does <emph>elasticity</emph>, for
instance, appear <emph>as</emph> elasticity. It sinks down into the
nearest approach to its <emph>physical</emph> form by a series of degrees
from the contraction and elongation of the irritable muscle
to the physical hardness of the insensitive nail. The
lower powers are <emph>assimilated</emph>, not merely <emph>employed</emph>, and
assimilation presupposes the homogeneous nature of the
thing assimilated; else it is a miracle, only not the same
as that of a <emph>creation</emph>, because it would imply that additional
and equal miracle of annihilation. In short, all
the impossibilities which the acutest of the reformed
Divines have detected in the hypothesis of transubstantiation
would apply, <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">totidem
verbis et syllabis</foreign>, to that of
assimilation, if the objects and the agents were really
heterogeneous. Unless, therefore, a thing can exhibit
properties which do not belong to it, the very admission
that living matter exhibits physical properties, includes
the further admission, that those <emph>physical</emph> or dead properties
are themselves vital in essence, really <emph>distinct</emph> but
<pb n="044"/><anchor id="Pg044"/>
in appearance only <emph>different</emph>; or in absolute contrast with
each other.
</p>

<p>
In all cases that which, <emph>abstractly</emph> taken, is the definition
of the <emph>kind</emph>, will, when applied <emph>absolutely</emph>, or in its
fullest sense, be the definition of the highest <emph>degree</emph> of that
kind. If life, in general, be defined <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">vis ab intra, cujus
proprium est coadunare plura in rem unicam, quantùm est
res unica</foreign>; the unity will be more intense in proportion as
it constitutes each particular thing a whole of itself; and
yet more, again, in proportion to the number and interdependence
of the parts, which it unites as a whole. But
a whole composed, <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ab
intra</foreign>, of different parts, so far interdependent
that each is reciprocally means and end, is an
individual, and the individuality is most intense where the
greatest dependence of the parts on the whole is combined
with the greatest dependence of the whole on its parts;
the first (namely, the dependence of the parts on the
whole) being absolute; the second (namely, the dependence
of the whole on its parts) being proportional to the
importance of the relation which the parts have to the
whole, that is, as their action extends more or less beyond
themselves. For this spirit of the whole is most expressed
in that part which derives its importance as an End from
its importance as a Mean, relatively to all the parts under
the same copula.
</p>

<p>
Finally, of individuals, the living power will be most intense
in that individual which, as a whole, has the greatest
number of integral parts presupposed in it; when, moreover,
these integral parts, together with a proportional increase
of their interdependence, as <emph>parts</emph>, have themselves most
<pb n="045"/><anchor id="Pg045"/>
the character of wholes in the sphere occupied by them. A
mathematical point, line, or surface, is an <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">ens rationis</foreign>, for
it expresses an intellectual act; but a physical atom is
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ens fictitium</foreign>,
which may be made subservient, as ciphers
are in arithmetic, to the purposes of hypothetical construction,
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">per regulam falsi</foreign>;
but transferred to <emph>Nature</emph>, it is in
the strictest sense an <emph>absurd</emph> quantity; for extension, and
consequently divisibility, or <emph>multeity</emph>,<note place="foot">Much
against my will I repeat this scholastic term, <emph>multeity</emph>, but I have
sought in vain for an unequivocal word of a less repulsive character, that
would convey the notion in a positive and not comparative sense in kind, as
opposed to the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">unum et
simplex</foreign>, not in degree, as contracted with the <emph>few</emph>.
We can conceive no reason that can be adduced in justification of the word
<emph>caloric</emph>, as invented to distinguish the external cause of
the sensation heat, which would not equally authorise the introduction
of a technical term in this instance.</note> (for space cannot be
divided,) is the indispensable condition, under which alone
anything can <emph>appear</emph> to us, or even be <emph>thought</emph> of, as a
<emph>thing</emph>. But if it should be replied, that the elementary
particles are atoms not positively, but by such a hardness
communicated to them as is relatively invincible, I should
remind the assertor that <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">temeraria
citatio supernaturalium est pulvinar intellectús pigri</foreign>,
and that he who requires me
to believe a miracle of his own dreaming, must first work
a miracle to convince me that he had dreamt by inspiration.
Add, too, the gross inconsistency of resorting to an
immaterial influence in order to complete a system of
materialism, by the exclusion of all modes of existence
which the theorist cannot in imagination, at least, <emph>finger</emph>
and <emph>peep</emph> at! Each of the preceding gradations, as above
defined, might be represented as they exist, and are realised
in Nature. But each would require a work for itself,
<pb n="046"/><anchor id="Pg046"/>
co-extensive with the science of metals, and that of fossils
(both as geologically applied); of crystallization; and of
vegetable and animal physiology, in all its distinct
branches. The nature of the present essay scarcely permits
the space sufficient to illustrate our meaning. The
proof of its probability (for to that only can we arrive by
so partial an application of the hypothesis), is to be found
in its powers of solving the particular class of phenomena,
that form the subjects of the present inquisition, more
satisfactorily and profitably than has been done, or even
attempted before.
</p>

<p>
Exclusively, therefore, for the purposes of <emph>illustration</emph>,
I would take as an instance of the first step, the metals,
those, namely, that are capable of permanent reduction.
For, by the established laws of nomenclature, the others
(as sodium, potassium, calcium, silicium, &amp;c.) would be
entitled to a class of their own, under the name of <emph>bases</emph>.
It is long since the chemists have despaired of decomposing
this class of bodies. They still remain, one and all, as
elements or simple bodies, though, on the principles of
the corpuscularian philosophy, nothing can be more improbable
than that they really are such; and no reason
has or can be assigned on the grounds of that system,
why, in no one instance, the contrary has not been proved.
But this is at once explained, if we assume them as the
simplest form of unity, namely, the unity of powers and
properties. For these, it is evident, may be endlessly
modified, but can never be decomposed. If I were asked
by a philosopher who had previously extended the attribute
of Life to the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">Byssus speciosa</foreign>,
and even to the crustaceous
matter, or outward bones of a lobster, &amp;c., whether
<pb n="047"/><anchor id="Pg047"/>
the ingot of gold expressed <emph>life</emph>, I should answer without
hesitation, as the <emph>ingot</emph> of gold assuredly not, for its form
is accidental and <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ab extra</foreign>.
It may be added to or detracted
from without in the least affecting the nature,
state, or properties in the specific matter of which the
ingot consists. But as <emph>gold</emph>, as that special union of absolute
and of relative gravity, ductility, and hardness, which,
wherever they are found, constitute <emph>gold</emph>, I should answer
no less fearlessly, in the affirmative. But I should further
add, that of the two counteracting tendencies of nature,
namely, that of <emph>detachment</emph> from the universal life, which
universality is represented to us by gravitation, and that
of <emph>attachment</emph> or reduction into it, this and the other noble
metals represented the units in which the latter tendency,
namely, that of identity with the life of nature, subsisted
in the greatest overbalance over the former. It is the
form of unity with the least degree of tendency to
individuation.
</p>

<p>
Rising in the ascent, I should take, as illustrative of
the second step, the various forms of crystals as a union,
not of powers only, but of parts, and as the simplest forms
of composition in the next narrowest sphere of affinity.
Here the form, or apparent <emph>quantity</emph>, is manifestly the
result of the <emph>quality</emph>, and the chemist himself not seldom
admits them as infallible characters of the substances
united in the whole of a given crystal.
</p>

<p>
In the first step, we had Life, as the mere <emph>unity</emph> of
powers; in the second we have the simplest forms of
<emph>totality</emph> evolved. The third step is presented to us in
those vast formations, the tracing of which generically
would form the science of Geology, or its history in the
<pb n="048"/><anchor id="Pg048"/>
strict sense of the word, even as their description and
diagnostics constitute its preliminaries.
</p>

<p>
Their claim to this rank I cannot here even attempt
to support. It will be sufficient to explain my reason
for having assigned it to them, by the avowal, that I regard
them in a twofold point of view: 1st, as the residue and
product of vegetable and animal life; 2d, as manifesting
the tendencies of the Life of Nature to vegetation or
animalization. And this process I believe&mdash;in one instance
by the peat morasses of the northern, and in the other
instance by the coral banks of the southern hemisphere&mdash;to
be still connected with the present order of vegetable
and animal Life, which constitute the fourth and last step
in these wide and comprehensive divisions.
</p>

<p>
In the lowest forms of the vegetable and animal world
we perceive totality dawning into <emph>individuation</emph>, while in
man, as the highest of the class, the individuality is not
only perfected in its corporeal sense, but begins a new
series beyond the appropriate limits of physiology. The
tendency to individuation, more or less obscure, more or
less obvious, constitutes the common character of all
classes, as far as they maintain for themselves a distinction
from the universal life of the planet; while the
degrees, both of intensity and extension, to which this
tendency is realized, form the species, and their ranks
in the great scale of ascent and expansion.
</p>

<p>
In the treatment of a subject so vast and complex,
within the limits prescribed for an essay like the present,
where it is impossible not to say either too much or too little
(and too much because too little), an author is entitled to
make large claims on the candour of his judges. Many
<pb n="049"/><anchor id="Pg049"/>
things he must express inaccurately, not from ignorance
or oversight, but because the more precise expression
would have involved the necessity of a further explanation,
and this another, even to the first elements of the science.
This is an inconvenience which presses on the analytic
method, on however large a scale it may be conducted,
compared with the synthetic; and it must bear with a
tenfold weight in the present instance, where we are not
permitted to avail ourselves of its usual advantages as a
counterbalance to its inherent defects. I shall have
done all that I dared propose to myself, or that can
be justly demanded of me by others, if I have succeeded
in conveying a sufficiently clear, though indistinct and
inadequate notion, so as of its many results to render intelligible
that one which I am to apply to my particular
subject, not as a truth already demonstrated, but as an
hypothesis, which pretends to no higher merit than that of
explaining the particular class of phenomena to which it
is applied, and asks no other reward than a presumption
in favour of the general system of which it affirms itself to
be a dependent though integral part. By Life I everywhere
mean the true Idea of Life, or that most general
form under which Life manifests itself to us, which includes
all its other forms. This I have stated to be the
<emph>tendency to individuation</emph>, and the degrees or intensities
of Life to consist in the progressive realization of this
tendency. The power which is acknowledged to exist,
wherever the realization is found, must subsist wherever
the tendency is manifested. The power which comes
forth and stirs abroad in the bird, must be latent in the
egg. I have shown, moreover, that this tendency to
<pb n="050"/><anchor id="Pg050"/>
individuate cannot be conceived without the opposite
tendency to connect, even as the centrifugal power supposes
the centripetal, or as the two opposite poles constitute
each other, and are the constituent acts of one and the
same power in the magnet. We might say that the life
of the magnet subsists in their union, but that it lives
(acts or manifests itself) in their strife. Again, if the
tendency be at once to individuate and to connect, to
detach, but so as either to retain or to reproduce attachment,
the individuation itself must be a tendency to the
ultimate production of the highest and most comprehensive
individuality. This must be the one great end of Nature,
her ultimate object, or by whatever other word we may
designate that something which bears to a final cause the
same relation that Nature herself bears to the Supreme
Intelligence.
</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>
According to the plan I have prescribed for this inquisition,
we are now to seek for the highest law, or most
general form, under which this tendency acts, and then
to pursue the same process with this, as we have already
done with the tendency itself, namely, having stated the
law in its highest abstraction, to present it in the different
forms in which it appears and reappears in higher and
higher dignities. I restate the question. The tendency
having been ascertained, what is its most general law?
I answer&mdash;<emph>polarity</emph>, or the essential dualism of Nature,
arising out of its productive unity, and still tending to reaffirm
it, either as equilibrium, indifference, or identity.
In its <emph>productive power</emph>, of which the product is the only
measure, consists its incompatibility with mathematical
<pb n="051"/><anchor id="Pg051"/>
calculus. For the full applicability of an abstract science
ceases, the moment reality begins.<note place="foot"><p>For abstractions
are the conditions and only subject of all abstract
sciences. Thus the theorist (vide Dalton's Theory), who reduces the chemical
process to the positions of atoms, would doubtless thereby render chemistry
calculable, but that he commences by destroying the chemical process itself,
and substitutes for it a <hi rend='italic'>mote dance</hi>
of abstractions; for even the powers which
he appears to leave real, those of attraction and repulsion, he immediately
unrealizes by representing them as diverse and separable properties. We can
abstract the quantities and the quantitative motion from masses, passing over
or leaving for other sciences the question of what constitutes the masses, and
thus apply not to the masses themselves, but to the abstractions therefrom,&mdash;the
laws of geometry and universal arithmetic. And where the quantities
are the infallible signs of real powers, and our chief concern with the masses
is as <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">SIGNS</hi>,
sciences may be founded thereon of the highest use and dignity.
Such, for instance, is the sublime science of astronomy, having for its objects
the vast masses which <q>God placed in the firmament of the heaven to be for
<emph>signs</emph> and for seasons, for days and years.</q> For the whole
doctrine of physics may be reduced to three great divisions: First,
<emph>quantitative motion</emph>, which is
proportioned to the quantity of matter exclusively. This is the science of
weight or statics. Secondly, <emph>relative motion</emph>, as communicated
to bodies externally
by impact. This is the science of mechanics. Thirdly, <emph>qualitative motion</emph>,
or that which is accordant to properties of matter. And this is chemistry.
Now it is evident that the first two sciences presuppose that which forms the
exclusive object of the third, namely, quality; for all quantity in nature is
either itself derived, or at least derives its powers from some <emph>quality</emph>,
as that of weight, specific cohesion, hardness, &amp;c.; and therefore the attempt
to reduce to the distances or impacts of atoms, under the assumptions of two
powers, which are themselves declared to be no more than mere general
terms for those quantities of motion and impact (the atom itself being a
fiction formed by abstraction, and in truth a third occult quality for the
purpose of explaining hardness and density), amounts to an attempt to
destroy chemistry itself, and at the same time to exclude the sole reality and
only positive contents of the very science into which that of chemistry is to
be degraded. Now what qualities are to chemistry, <emph>productiveness</emph> is to the
science of Life; and this being excluded, physiology or zoonomy would sink
into chemistry, chemistry by the same process into mechanics, while mechanics
themselves would lose the substantial principle, which, bending the
lower extreme towards its apex, produces the organic circle of the sciences,
and elevates them all into different arcs or stations of the one absolute
science of Life.
</p>
<p>
This explanation, which in appearance only is a digression, was indispensably
requisite to prevent the idea of polarity, which has been given as the
universal law of Life, from being misunderstood as a mere refinement on
those mechanical systems of physiology, which it has been my main object to
explode.</p></note> Life, then, we consider
as the copula, or the unity of thesis and antithesis,
position and counterposition,&mdash;Life itself being the positive
of both; as, on the other hand, the two counterpoints
are the necessary conditions of the <emph>manifestations</emph> of Life.
These, by the same necessity, unite in a synthesis;
which again, by the law of dualism, essential to all actual
existence, expands, or <emph>produces</emph> itself, from the point into
the <emph>line</emph>, in order again to converge, as the initiation of
the same productive process in some intenser form of
reality. Thus, in the identity of the two counter-powers,
Life <emph>sub</emph>sists; in their strife it <emph>con</emph>sists: and in their
reconciliation
<pb n="052"/><anchor id="Pg052"/>
it at once dies and is born again into a new
form, either falling back into the life of the whole, or
starting anew in the process of individuation.
</p>

<p>
Whence shall we take our beginning? From Space,
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">istud litigium
philosophorum</foreign>, which leaves the mind
equally dissatisfied, whether we deny or assert its real
existence. To make it wholly ideal, would be at the same
time to idealize all phenomena, and to undermine the
very conception of an external world. To make it real,
would be to assert the existence of something, with the
properties of nothing. It would far transcend the height
to which a physiologist must confine his flights, should
we attempt to reconcile this apparent contradiction. It
is the duty and the privilege of the theologian to demonstrate,
that <emph>space</emph> is the ideal organ by which the soul of
man perceives the <emph>omnipresence</emph> of the Supreme Reality,
as distinct from the works, which in him move, and live,
<pb n="053"/><anchor id="Pg053"/>
and have their being; while the equal mystery of <emph>Time</emph>
bears the same relation to his <emph>Eternity</emph>, or what is fully
equivalent, his Unity.
</p>

<p>
Physiologically contemplated, Nature begins, proceeds,
and ends in a contradiction; for the moment of absolute
solution would be that in which Nature would cease to
be Nature, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a scheme of ever-varying relations; and
physiology, in the ambitious attempt to solve phenomena
into absolute realities, would itself become a mere web of
verbal abstractions.
</p>

<p>
But it is in strict connexion with our subject, that we
should make the universal <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">FORMS</hi>
as well as the not less universal <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">LAW</hi>
of Life, clear and intelligible in the example of <emph>Time</emph>
and <emph>Space</emph>, these being both the first specification
of the principle, and ever after its indispensable symbols.
First, a single act of self-inquiry will show the impossibility
of distinctly conceiving the one without some involution
of the other; either time expressed in space, in
the form of the mathematical line, or space within time,
as in the circle. But to form the first conception of a
<emph>real</emph> thing, we state both as one in the idea, <emph>duration</emph>.
The formula is: (A=B+B=A)=(A=A) or the oneness
of space and time, is the predicate of all <emph>real</emph> being.
</p>

<p>
But as little can we conceive the oneness, except as
the mid-point producing itself on each side; that is,
manifesting itself on two opposite poles. Thus, from
identity we derive duality, and from both together we
obtain polarity, synthesis, indifference, predominance.
The line is Time + Space, under the predominance of
Time: Surface is Space + Time, under the predominance
of Space, while Line + Surface as the synthesis of
<pb n="054"/><anchor id="Pg054"/>
units, is the circle in the first dignity; to the sphere in
the second; and to the globe in the third. In short,
neither can the antagonists appear but as two forces of
one power, nor can the power be conceived by us but as
the equatorial point of the two counteracting forces; of
which the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">hypomochlion</foreign>
of the lever is as good an illustration
as anything can be that is thought of <emph>mechanically</emph>
only, and exclusively of life. To make it adequate, we
must substitute the idea of positive production for that of
rest, or mere neutralization. To the fancy alone it is the
null-point, or zero, but to the reason it is the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">punctum
saliens</foreign>, and the power itself in its eminence. Even in
these, the most abstract and universal forms of all thought
and perception&mdash;even in the ideas of time and space, we
slip under them, as it were, a <emph>substratum</emph>; for we cannot
think of them but as far as they are co-inherent, and
therefore as reciprocally the measures of each other.
Nor, again, can we finish the process without having the
idea of <emph>motion</emph> as its immediate product. Thus we say,
that time has one dimension, and imagine it to ourselves
as a line. But the line we have already proved to be the
productive synthesis of time, with space under the predominance
of time. If we exclude space by an abstract
assumption, the time remains as a spaceless point, and
represents the concentered power of unity and active
negation, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> retraction,
determination, and limit, <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ab
intra</foreign>. But if we assume the time as excluded, the line
vanishes, and we leave space dimensionless, an indistinguishable
ALL, and therefore the representative of absolute
weakness and formlessness, but, for that very reason,
of infinite capacity and formability.
</p>

<pb n="055"/><anchor id="Pg055"/>

<p>
We have been thus full and express on this subject,
because these simple ideas of time, space, and motion, of
length, breadth, and depth, are not only the simplest and
universal, but the necessary symbols of all philosophic
construction. They will be found the primary factors and
elementary forms of every calculus and of every diagram
in the algebra and geometry of a scientific physiology.
Accordingly, we shall recognise the same forms under
other names; but at each return more specific and intense;
and the whole process repeated with ascending
gradations of reality, <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">exempli gratiâ</foreign>: Time + space
= motion; <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">T</hi><hi rend='italic'>m</hi>
+ space = line + breadth = depth;
depth + motion = force;
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">L</hi><hi rend='italic'>f</hi>
+ <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">B</hi><hi rend='italic'>f</hi>
= <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">D</hi><hi rend='italic'>f</hi>;
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">LD</hi><hi rend='italic'>f</hi> +
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">BD</hi><hi rend='italic'>f</hi> =
attraction + repulsion = gravitation; and so
on, even till they pass into outward phenomena, and form
the intermediate link between productive powers and fixed
products in light, heat, and electricity. If we pass to the
construction of matter, we find it as the product, or
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">tertium aliud</foreign>,
of antagonist powers of repulsion and
attraction. Remove these powers, and the conception of
matter vanishes into space&mdash;conceive repulsion only, and
you have the same result. For infinite repulsion, uncounteracted
and alone, is tantamount to infinite, dimensionless
diffusion, and this again to infinite weakness; viz.,
to space. Conceive attraction alone, and as an infinite
contraction, its product amounts to the absolute point,
viz., to time. Conceive the synthesis of both, and you
have matter as a fluxional antecedent, which, in the very
act of formation, passes into body by its gravity, and yet
in all bodies it still remains as their mass, which, being
exclusively calculable under the law of gravitation, gives
<pb n="056"/><anchor id="Pg056"/>
rise, as we before observed, to the science of statics, most
improperly called celestial mechanics.
</p>

<p>
In strict consistence with the same philosophy which,
instead of considering the powers of bodies to have been
miraculously stuck into a prepared and pre-existing
matter, as pins into a pin-cushion, conceives the powers
as the productive factors, and the body or phenomenon as
the fact, product, or fixture; we revert again to potentiated
length in the power of magnetism; to surface in
the power of electricity; and to the synthesis of both, or
potentiated depth, in constructive, that is, chemical
affinity. But while the two factors are as poles to each
other, each factor has likewise its own poles, and thus in
the simple cross&mdash;
</p>

<p>
With <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">M M</hi>, the magnetic line, running from top
to bottom, with <hi rend='italic'>f f</hi> its northern
pole, or pole of attraction; and <hi rend='italic'>m m</hi> its south, or pole of
repulsion, and <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">E E</hi>, running from left to
right, one of the lines that spring from each
point of M M, with its east, or pole of contraction, and
<hi rend='italic'>d</hi> its west, or pole of diffluence and expansion&mdash;we have
presented to us the universal quadruplicity, or four
elemental forms of power; in the endless proportions and
<pb n="057"/><anchor id="Pg057"/>
modifications of which, the innumerable offspring of all-bearing
Nature consist. Wisely docile to the suggestions
of Nature herself, the ancients significantly expressed these
forces under the names of earth, water, air, and fire; not
meaning any tangible or visible substance so generalized,
but the powers predominant, and, as it were, the living
basis of each, which no chemical decomposition can ever
present to the senses, were it only that their interpenetration
and co-inherence first constitutes them sensible,
and is the condition and meaning of a&mdash;<emph>thing</emph>. Already
our more truly philosophical naturalists (Ritter, for
instance) have begun to generalize the four great elements
of chemical nomenclature, carbon, azote, oxygen, and
hydrogen: the two former as the positive and negative
pole of the magnetic axis, or as the power of fixity and
mobility; and the two latter as the opposite poles, or plus
and minus states of cosmical electricity, as the powers of
contraction and dilatation, or of comburence and combustibility.
These powers are to each other as longitude to
latitude, and the poles of each relatively as north to south,
and as east to west. For surely the reader will find no distrust
in a system only because Nature, ever consistent with herself,
presents us everywhere with harmonious and accordant
symbols of her consistent doctrines. Nothing would be
more easy than, by the ordinary principles of sound logic
and common sense, to demonstrate the impossibility and
expose the absurdity of the corpuscularian or mechanic
system, or than to prove the intenable nature of any intermediate
system. But we cannot force any man into an
insight or intuitive possession of the true philosophy,
because we cannot give him abstraction, intellectual
<pb n="058"/><anchor id="Pg058"/>
intuition, or constructive imagination; because we cannot
organize for him an eye that can see, an ear that can listen
to, or a heart that can feel, the harmonies of Nature, or
recognise in her endless forms, the thousand-fold realization
of those simple and majestic laws, which yet in their
absoluteness can be discovered only in the recesses of his
own spirit,&mdash;not by that man, therefore, whose imaginative
powers have been <emph>ossified</emph> by the continual reaction
and assimilating influences of mere <emph>objects</emph> on his mind,
and who is a prisoner to his own eye and its reflex, the
passive fancy!&mdash;not by him in whom an unbroken familiarity
with the organic world, as if it were mechanical,
with the sensitive, but as if it were insensate, has engendered
the coarse and hard spirit of a sorcerer. The former
is unable, the latter unwilling, to master the absolute pre-requisites.
There is neither hope nor occasion for him <q>to
cudgel his brains about it, he has no feeling of the business.</q>
If he do not see the necessity from without, if he
have not learned the possibility from within, of interpenetration,
of total intussusception, of the existence of all in
each as the condition of Nature's unity and substantiality,
and of the latency under the predominance of some one
power, wherein subsists her life and its endless variety, as
he must be, by habitual slavery to the eye, or its reflex,
the passive fancy, under the influences of the corpuscularian
philosophy, he has so paralysed his imaginative
powers as to be unable&mdash;or by that hardness and heart-hardening
spirit of contempt, which is sure to result from
a perpetual commune with the lifeless, he has so far
debased his inward being&mdash;as to be unwilling to comprehend
the pre-requisite, he must be content, while standing
<pb n="059"/><anchor id="Pg059"/>
thus at the threshold of philosophy, to receive the results,
though he cannot be admitted to the deliberation&mdash;in
other words, to act upon <emph>rules</emph> which he is incapable of
understanding as <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">LAWS</hi>,
and to reap the harvest with the
sharpened iron for which others have delved for him in
the mine.
</p>

<p>
It is not improbable that there may exist, and even be
discovered, higher forms and more akin to Life than those
of magnetism, electricity, and constructive (or chemical)
affinity appear to be, even in their finest known influences.
It is not improbable that we may hereafter find ourselves
justified in revoking certain of the latter, and unappropriating
them to a yet unnamed triplicity; or that, being
thus assisted, we may obtain a qualitative instead of a
quantitative insight into vegetable animation, as distinct
from animal, and that of the insect world from both. But
in the present state of science, the magnetic, electric, and
chemical powers are the last and highest of inorganic
nature. These, therefore, we assume as presenting themselves
again to us, in their next metamorphosis, as reproduction
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> growth and identity of the whole, amid
the change or flux of all the parts), irritability and sensibility;
reproduction corresponding to magnetism, irritability
to electricity, and sensibility to constructive chemical
affinity.
</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>
But before we proceed further, it behoves us to answer
the objections contained in the following passage, or withdraw
ourselves in time from the bitter contempt in which
it would involve us. Acting under such a necessity, we
need not apologise for the length of the quotation.
</p>

<pb n="060"/><anchor id="Pg060"/>

<p>
1. <q>If,</q> says Mr. Lawrence, <q>the properties of living
matter are to be explained in this way, why should not
we adopt the same plan with physical properties, and
account for gravitation, or chemical affinity, by the supposition
of appropriate subtile fluids? Why does the irritability
of a muscle need such an explanation, if explanation
it can be called, more than the elective attraction of
a salt?</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>To make the matter more intelligible, this vital
principle is compared to magnetism, to electricity, and to
galvanism; or it is roundly stated to be oxygen. 'Tis
like a camel, or like a whale, or like what you please.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>You have only to grant that the phenomena of
the sciences just alluded to depend on extremely fine and
invisible fluids, superadded to the matters in which they
are exhibited, and to allow further that Life, and magnetic,
galvanic, and electric phenomena correspond perfectly;
the existence of a subtile matter of Life will then be a very
probable inference.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>On this illustration you will naturally remark,
that the existence of the magnetic, electric, and galvanic
fluids, which is offered as a proof of the existence of a
vital fluid, is as much a matter of doubt as that of the
vital fluid itself.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>It is singular, also, that the vital principle should
be like both magnetism and electricity, when these two
are not like each other.</q>
</p>

<pb n="061"/><anchor id="Pg061"/>

<p>
6. <q>It would have been interesting to have had this
illustration prosecuted a little further. We should have
been pleased to learn whether the human body is more
like a loadstone, a voltaic pile, or an electrical machine;
whether the organs are to be regarded as Leyden jars,
magnetic needles, or batteries.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>The truth is, there is no resemblance, no analogy,
between Electricity and Life; the two orders of phenomena
are completely distinct; they are incommensurable.
Electricity illustrates life no more than life illustrates
electricity.</q><note place="foot">I apprehend that
by men of a certain school it would be deemed no
demerit, even though they should never have condescended to look into any
system of Aristotelian logic. It is enough for these gentlemen that they are
experimentalists! Let it not, however, be supposed that they make more
experiments than their neighbours, who consider induction as a means and
not an end; or have stronger motives for making them, unless it can be believed
that Tycho Brähe must have been urged to repeat his sweeps of the
heavens with greater accuracy and industry than Herschel, for no better reason
than that the former flourished before the theory of gravitation was perfected.
No, but they have the honour of being mere experimentalists! If, however,
we may not refer to logic, we may to common sense and common experience.
It is not improbable, however, that they have both read and studied a book of
hypothetical psychology on the assumptions of the crudest materialism, stolen
too without acknowledgment from our David Hartley's essay on Man, which
is well known under the whimsical name of Condillac's Logic. But, as Mr.
Brand has lately observed, <q>the French are a queer people,</q> and we should
not be at all surprised to hear of a book of fresh importation from Paris, on
determinate proportions in chemistry, announced by the author in his title-page
as a new and improved system either of arithmetic or geometry.</note>
</p>

<p>
To avoid unnecessary description, I shall refer to the
passages by the numbers affixed to them, for that purpose,
in the margin.
</p>

<pb n="062"/><anchor id="Pg062"/>

<p>
In reply to No. 1, I ask whether, in the nature of the
mind, illustration and explanation must not of necessity
proceed from the lower to the higher? or whether a boy
is to be taught his addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division, by the highest branches of algebraic analysis?
Is there any better way of systematic teaching, than that
of illustrating each new step, or having each new step illustrated
to him by its identity in kind with the step the
next below it? though it be the only mode in which this
objection can be answered, yet it seems affronting to remind
the objector, of rules so simple as that the complex
must even be illustrated by the more simple, or the less
scrutible by that which is more subject to our examination.
</p>

<p>
In reply to No. 2, I first refer to the author's eulogy
on Mr. Hunter, p. 163, in which he is justly extolled for
having <q>surveyed the whole <emph>system</emph> of organized beings,
from plants to man:</q> of course, therefore, <emph>as</emph> a <emph>system</emph>;
and therefore under some <emph>one common law</emph>. Now in the
very same sense, and no other, than that in which the
writer himself by implication compares himself as a man
to the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">dermestes typographicus</foreign>,
or the <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">fucus scorpioides</foreign>,
do I compare the principle of Life to magnetism, electricity,
and constructive affinity,&mdash;or rather to that power
to which the two former are the thesis and antithesis, the
latter the synthesis. But if to compare involve the sense
of its etymon, and involve the sense of parity, I utterly
deny that I do at all compare them; and, in truth, in
no conceivable sense of the word is it applicable, any
more than a geometrician can be affirmed to compare a
polygon to a point, because he generates the line out of
the point. The writer attributes to a philosophy essentially
<pb n="063"/><anchor id="Pg063"/>
vital the barrenness of the mechanic system, with
which alone his imagination has been familiarised, and
which, as hath been justly observed by a contemporary
writer, is contradistinguished from the former principally
in this respect; that demanding for every mode and act
of existence real or possible visibility, it knows only of
distance and nearness, composition (or rather compaction)
and decomposition, in short, the relations of unproductive
particles to each other; so that in every instance the result
is the exact sum of the component qualities, as in
arithmetical addition. This is the philosophy of Death,
and only of a dead nature can it hold good. In Life,
and in the view of a vital philosophy, the two component
counter-powers actually interpenetrate each other, and
generate a higher third, including both the former, <q>ita
tamen ut sit alia et major.</q>
</p>

<p>
As a complete answer to No. 3, I refer the reader to
many passages in the preceding and following pages, in
which, on far higher and more demonstrative grounds
than the mechanic system can furnish, I have exposed the
unmeaningness and absurdity of these finer fluids, as applied
even to electricity itself; unless, indeed, they are
assumed as its product. But in addition I beg leave to
remind the author, that it is incomparably more agreeable
to all experience to originate the formative process in the
<emph>fluid</emph>, whether fine or gross, than in corporeal <emph>atoms</emph>, in
which we are not only deserted by all experience, but contradicted
by the primary conception of body itself.
</p>

<p>
Equally inapplicable is No. 4: and of No. 5 I can
only repeat, first, that I do not make Life <emph>like</emph> magnetism,
or <emph>like</emph> electricity; that the difference between
<pb n="064"/><anchor id="Pg064"/>
magnetism and electricity, and the powers illustrated by
them, is an essential part of my system, but that the
animal Life of man is the identity of all three. To whatever
other system this objection may apply, it is utterly
irrelevant to that which I have here propounded: though
from the narrow limits prescribed to me, it has been propounded
with an inadequacy painful to my own feelings.
</p>

<p>
The ridicule in No. 6 might be easily retorted; but as
it could prove nothing, I will leave it where I found it, in
a page where nothing is proved.
</p>

<p>
A similar remark might be sufficient for the bold and
blank assertion (No. 7) with which the extract concludes;
but that I feel some curiosity to discover what meaning
the author attaches to the term analogy. Analogy implies
a difference in sort, and not merely in degree; and it is
the sameness of the end, with the difference of the means,
which constitutes analogy. No one would say the lungs
of a man were analogous to the lungs of a monkey, but
any one might say that the gills of fish and the spiracula
of insects are analogous to lungs. Now if there be any
philosophers who have asserted that electricity as electricity
is the <emph>same</emph> as Life, for that reason they cannot be <emph>analogous</emph>
to each other; and as no man in his senses, philosopher
or not, is capable of imagining that the lightning
which destroys a sheep, was a means to the same end with
the principle of its organization; for this reason, too, the
two powers cannot be represented as analogous. Indeed
I know of no system in which the word, as thus applied,
would admit of an endurable meaning, but that which
teaches us, that a mass of marrow in the skull is analogous
to the rational soul, which Plato and Bacon, equally
<pb n="065"/><anchor id="Pg065"/>
with the <q>poor Indian,</q> believe themselves to have received
from the Supreme Reason.
</p>

<p>
It would be blindness not to see, or affectation to pretend
not to see, the work at which these sarcasms were
levelled. The author of that work is abundantly able to
defend his own opinions; yet I should be ambitious to
address <emph>him</emph> at the close of the contest in the lines of the
great Roman poet:
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend="pre">Et nos tela, Pater, ferrumque haud debile dextrâ</q></l>
<l><q rend="post">Spargimus, et nostro sequitur, de vulnere sanguis.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
In Mr. Abernethy's Lecture on the Theory of Life, it
is impossible not to see a presentiment of a great truth.
He has, if I may so express myself, caught it in the
breeze: and we seem to hear the first glad opening and
shout with which he springs forward to the pursuit. But
it is equally evident that the prey has not been followed
through its doublings and windings, or driven
out from its brakes and covers into full and open view.
Many of the least tenable phrases may be fairly interpreted
as illustrations, rather than precise exponents of
the author's meaning; at least, while they remain as a
mere suggestion or annunciation of his ideas, and till he
has expanded them over a larger sphere, it would be unjust
to infer the contrary. But it is not with men, however
strongly their professional merits may entitle them to
reverence, that my concern is at present. If the opinions
here supported are the same with those of Mr. Abernethy,
I rejoice in his authority. If they are different, I shall
wait with an anxious interest for an exposition of that
difference.
</p>

<pb n="066"/><anchor id="Pg066"/>

<p>
Having reasserted that I no more confound magnetism
with electricity, or the chemical process, than the
mathematician confounds length with breadth, or either
with depth; I think it sufficient to add that there are
two views of the subject, the former of which I do not
believe attributable to any philosopher, while both are
alike disclaimed by me as forming any part of my views.
The first is that which is supposed to consider electricity
identical with life, as it subsists in organized bodies. The
other considers electricity as everywhere present, and
penetrating all bodies under the image of a subtile fluid
or substance, which, in Mr. Abernethy's inquiry, I
regard as little more than a mere diagram on his slate,
for the purpose of fixing the attention on the intellectual
conception, or as a possible <emph>product</emph>, (in which case electricity
must be a composite power,) or at worst, as words
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">quæ humana incuria fudit</foreign>.
This which, in inanimate Nature, is manifested now as magnetism, now as electricity,
and now as chemical agency, is supposed, on entering an
organized body, to constitute its vital <emph>principle</emph>, something
in the same manner as the steam becomes the <emph>mechanic</emph>
power of the steam-engine, in <emph>consequence</emph> of its compression
by the steam-engine; or as the breeze that murmurs
indistinguishably in the forest becomes the element, the
substratum, of melody in the Æolian harp, and of consummate
harmony in the organ. Now this hypothesis is as
directly opposed to my view as supervention is to evolution,
inasmuch as I hold the organized body itself, in all
its marvellous contexture, to be the <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">PRODUCT</hi>
and representant of the power which is here supposed to have
supervened to it. So far from admitting a <emph>transfer</emph>, I
<pb n="067"/><anchor id="Pg067"/>
do not admit it even in electricity itself, or in the phenomena
universally called electrical; among other points I
ground my explanation of remote sympathy on the directly
contrary supposition.
</p>

<p>
But my opinions will be best explained by a rapid
exemplification in the processes of Nature, from the first
rudiments of individualized life in the lowest classes of its
two great poles, the vegetable and animal creation, to its
crown and consummation in the human body; thus illustrating
at once the unceasing <emph>polarity of life, as the form
of its process, and its tendency to progressive individuation
as the law of its direction</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Among the conceptions, of the mere ideal character of
which the philosopher is well aware, and which yet become
necessary from the necessity of assuming a beginning;
the original fluidity of the planet is the chief. Under
some form or other it is expressed or implied in every
system of cosmogony and even of geology, from Moses to
Thales, and from Thales to Werner. This assumption
originates in the same law of mind that gave rise to the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">prima materia</foreign>
of the Peripatetic school. In order to
<emph>comprehend</emph> and <emph>explain</emph> the <emph>forms</emph> of things,
we must imagine a state <emph>antecedent</emph> to form. A chaos of heterogeneous
substances, such as our Milton has described, is
not only an <emph>impossible</emph> state (for this may be equally true
of every other attempt), but it is <emph>palpably</emph> impossible. It
presupposes, moreover, the thing it is intended to solve;
and makes <emph>that</emph> an <emph>effect</emph> which had been called in as the
explanatory <emph>cause</emph>. The requisite and only serviceable
fiction, therefore, is the representation of
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">CHAOS</hi> as one
<pb n="068"/><anchor id="Pg068"/>
vast homogeneous drop! In this sense it may be even
justified, as an appropriate symbol of the great fundamental
truth that all things spring from, and subsist in,
the endless strife between indifference and difference. The
whole history of Nature is comprised in the specification
of the transitional states from the one to the other. The
symbol only is fictitious: the thing signified is not only
grounded in truth&mdash;it is the law and actuating principle
of all other truths, whether physical or intellectual.
</p>

<p>
Now, by magnetism in its widest sense, I mean the
first and simplest <emph>differential</emph> act of Nature, as the power
which works in <emph>length</emph>, and produces the first distinction
between the indistinguishable by the generation of a <emph>line</emph>.
Relatively, therefore, to fluidity, that is, to matter, the
parts of which cannot be distinguished from each other by
figure, magnetism is the power of fixity; but, relatively to
itself, magnetism, like every other power in Nature, is
designated by its opposite poles, and must be represented
as the magnetic axis, the northern pole of which signifies
rest, attraction, fixity, coherence, or hardness; the element
of <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">EARTH</hi>
in the nomenclature of <emph>observation</emph> and the
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">CARBONIC</hi>
principle in that of <emph>experiment</emph>; while the southern
pole, as its antithesis, represents mobility, repulsion,
incoherence, and fusibility; the element of air in the
nomenclature of observation (that is, of Nature as it
appears to us when unquestioned by art), and azote or
nitrogen in the nomenclature of experiment (that is, of
Nature in the state so beautifully allegorized in the
Homeric fable of Proteus bound down, and forced to
answer by Ulysses, after having been pursued through all
<pb n="069"/><anchor id="Pg069"/>
his metamorphoses into his ultimate form.<note place="foot">Such is the
interpretation given by Lord Bacon. To which of the two
gigantic intellects, the poet's or philosophic commentator's, the allegory belongs,
I shall not presume to decide. Its extraordinary beauty and appropriateness
remains the same in either case.</note>) That nothing
real does or can exist corresponding to either pole <emph>exclusively</emph>,
is involved in the very definition of a <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">THING</hi>
as the
synthesis of opposing energies. That a thing <emph>is</emph>, is owing
to the co-inherence therein of any two powers; but that
it is <emph>that</emph> particular thing arises from the proportions in
which these powers are co-present, either as predominance
or as reciprocal neutralization; but under the modification
of twofold power to which magnetism itself is, as the thesis
to its antithesis.
</p>

<p>
The correspondent, in the world of the senses, to the
magnetic axis, exists in the series of metals. The metalleity,
as the universal base of the planet, is a necessary
deduction from the principles of the system. From the
infusible, though evaporable, diamond to nitrogen itself,
the metallic nature of which has been long suspected by
chemists, though still under the mistaken notion of an
oxyde, we trace a series of metals from the maximum of
coherence to positive fluidity, in all ordinary temperatures,
we mean. Though, in point of fact, cold itself is but a
superinduction of the one pole, or, what amounts to the
same thing, the subtraction of the other, under the modifications
afore described; and therefore are the metals
indecomposible, because they are themselves the decompositions
of the metallic axis, in all its degrees of longitude
and latitude. Thus the substance of the planet from which
it <emph>is</emph>, is metallic; while that which is ever <emph>becoming</emph>, is in
<pb n="070"/><anchor id="Pg070"/>
like manner produced through the perpetual modification
of the first by the opposite forces of the second; that is,
by the principle of contraction and difference at the eastern
extreme&mdash;the element of fire, or the oxygen of the chemists;
and by the elementary power of dilatation, or
universality at its western extreme&mdash;the <foreign lang="el">ὑδωρ ἐν ὑδατι</foreign>
of the ancients, and the hydrogen of the laboratory.
</p>

<p>
It has been before noticed that the progress of Nature
is more truly represented by the ladder, than by the suspended
chain, and that she expands as by concentric circles.
This is, indeed, involved in the very conception of individuation,
whether it be applied to the different species or to
the individuals. In what manner the evident interspace
is reconciled with the equally evident continuity of
the life of Nature, is a problem that can be solved by those
minds alone, which have intuitively learnt that the whole
<emph>actual</emph> life of Nature originates in the existence, and consists
in the perpetual reconciliation, and as perpetual resurgency
of the primary contradiction, of which universal polarity is
the result and the exponent. From the first moment of
the differential impulse&mdash;(the primæval chemical epoch of
the Wernerian school)&mdash;when Nature, by the tranquil
deposition of crystals, prepared, as it were, the fulcrum
of her after-efforts, from this, her first, and in part <emph>irrevocable</emph>,
self-contraction, we find, in each ensuing production,
more and more tendency to independent existence
in the increasing multitude of strata, and in the relics of
the lowest orders, first of vegetable and then of animal
life. In the schistous formations, which we must here
assume as in great measure the residua of vegetable creations,
that have sunk back into the universal life, and in
<pb n="071"/><anchor id="Pg071"/>
the later predominant calcareous masses, which are the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">caput mortuum</foreign>
of animalized existence, we ascend from
the laws of attraction and repulsion, as united in gravity,
to magnetism, electricity, and constructive power, till we
arrive at the point representative of a new and far higher
intensity. For from this point flow, as in opposite directions,
the two streams of vegetation and animalization,
the former characterised by the predominance of magnetism
in its highest power, as reproduction, the other by electricity
intensified&mdash;as irritability, in like manner. The
vegetable and animal world are the thesis and antithesis,
or the opposite poles of organic life. We are not, therefore,
to seek in either for analogies to the other, but for
counterpoints. On the same account, the nearer the
common source, the greater the likeness; the farther the
remove, the greater the opposition. At the extreme limits
of inorganic Nature, we may detect a dim and obscure
prophecy of her ensuing process in the twigs and rude
semblances that occur in crystallization of some of the
copper ores, and in the well-known <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">arbor
Dianæ</foreign>, and <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">arbor
Veneris</foreign>. These latter Ritter has already ably explained
by considering the oblique branches and their acute
angles as the result of magnetic repulsion, from the presentation
of the same poles, &amp;c. In the <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">CORALS</hi> and
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">CONCHYLIA</hi>, the
whole act and purpose of their existence
seems to be that of connecting the animal with the inorganic
world by the perpetual formation of calcareous
earth. For the corals are nothing but polypi, which are
characterised by still passing away and dissolving into the
earth, which they had previously excreted, as if they were
the first feeble effort of detachment. The power seems to
<pb n="072"/><anchor id="Pg072"/>
step forward from out the inorganic world only to fall
back again upon it, still, however, under a new form, and
under the predominance of the more active pole of magnetism.
The product must have the same connexion,
therefore, with azote, which the first rudiments of vegetation
have with carbon: the one and the other exist not
for their own sakes, but in order to produce the conditions
best fitted for the production of higher forms. In the
polypi, corallines, &amp;c., individuality is in its first dawn;
there is the same shape in them all, and a multitude of
animals form, as it were, a common animal. And as the
individuals run into each other, so do the different genera.
They likewise pass into each other so indistinguishably,
that the whole order forms a very network.
</p>

<p>
As the corals approach the conchylia, this interramification
decreases. The tubipora forms the transition to
the serpula; for the characteristic of all zoophytes, namely,
the star shape of their openings, here disappears, and the
tubiporæ are distinguished from the rest of the corals by
this very circumstance, that the hollow calcareous pipes
are placed side by side, without interbranching. In the
serpula they have already become separate. How feeble
this attempt is to individuate, is most clearly shown in
their mode of generation. Notwithstanding the report
of Professor Pallas, it still remains doubtful whether
there exists any actual copulation among the polypi.
The mere existence of a polypus suffices for its endless
multiplication. They may be indefinitely propagated by
cuttings, so languid is the power of individuation, so
boundless that of reproduction. But the delicate jelly
dissolves, as lightly as it was formed, into its own product,
<pb n="073"/><anchor id="Pg073"/>
and it is probable that the Polynesia, as a future continent,
will be the gigantic monument, not so much of their
life, as of the life of Nature in them. Here we may
observe the first instance of that general law, according
to which Nature still assimilates her extreme points. In
these, her first and feeblest attempts to animalize organization,
it is latent, because undeveloped, and merely
potential; while, in the human brain, the last and most
consummate of her combined energies, it is again lost or
disguised in the subtlety<note place="foot">The Anatomical
Demonstrations of the Brain, by Dr. Spurzheim, which
I have seen, presented to me the most satisfactory proof of this.</note>
and multiplicity of its evolution.
</p>

<p>
In the class immediately above (Mollusca) we find the
individuals separate, a more determinate form, and in the
higher species, the rudiment of nerves, as the first scarce
distinguishable impress and exponent of sensibility; still,
however, the vegetative reproduction is the predominant
form; and even the nerves <q>which float in the same cavity
with the other viscera,</q> are probably subservient to it,
and extend their power in the increased intensity of the
reproductive force. Still prevails the transitional state
from the fluid to the solid; and the jelly, that rudiment
in which all animals, even the noblest, have their commencement;
constitutes the whole sphere of these rudimental
animals.
</p>

<p>
In the snail and muscle, the residuum of the coral reappears,
but refined and ennobled into a part of the animal.
The whole class is characterised by the separation of the
fluid from the solid. On the one side, a gelatinous semi-fluid;
on the other side, an entirely inorganic, though
often a most exquisitely mechanised, calcareous excretion.
</p>


<pb n="074"/><anchor id="Pg074"/>

<p>
Animalization in general is, we know, contra-distinguished
from vegetables in general by the predominance of azote
in the chemical composition, and of irritability in the
organic process. But in this and the foregoing classes,
as being still near the common equator, or the punctum
indifferentiæ, the carbonic principle still asserts its claims,
and the force of reproduction struggles with that of
irritability. In the unreconciled strife of these two forces
consists the character of the <emph>Vermes</emph>, which appear to be
the preparatory step for the next class. Hence the difficulties
which have embarrassed the naturalists, who adopt
the Linnæan classification, in their endeavours to discover
determinate characters of distinction between the vermes
and the insecta.
</p>

<p>
But no sooner have we passed the borders, than endless
variety of form and the bold display of instincts announce,
that Nature has succeeded. She has created the intermediate
link between the vegetable world, as the product
of the reproductive or magnetic power, and the animal as
the exponent of sensibility. Those that live and are
nourished, on the bodies of other animals, are comparatively
few, with little diversity of shape, and almost all
of the same natural family. These we may pass by as
exceptions. But the insect world, taken at large, appears
as an intenser life, that has struggled itself loose and
become emancipated from vegetation,
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">Floræ liberti, et
libertini!</foreign> If for the sake of a moment's relaxation we
might indulge a Darwinian flight, though at the risk of
provoking a smile, (not, I hope, a frown) from sober
judgment, we might imagine the life of insects an apotheosis
of the petals, stamina, and nectaries, round which
<pb n="075"/><anchor id="Pg075"/>
they flutter, or of the stems and pedicles, to which they
adhere. Beyond and above this step, Nature seems to act
with a sort of free agency, and to have formed the classes
from choice and bounty. Had she proceeded no further,
yet the whole vegetable, together with the whole insect
creation, would have formed within themselves an entire
and independent system of Life. All plants have insects,
most commonly each genus of vegetables its appropriate
genera of insects; and so reciprocally interdependent and
necessary to each other are they, that we can almost as
little think of vegetation without insects, as of insects
without vegetation. Though probably the mere likeness
of <emph>shape</emph>, in the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">papilio</foreign>,
and the papilionaceous plants, suggested
the idea of the former, as the latter in a state of
detachment, to our late poetical and theoretical brother;
yet a something, that approaches to a graver plausibility,
is given to this fancy of a flying blossom; when we reflect
how many plants depend upon insects for their fructification.
Be it remembered, too, that with few and very
obscure exceptions, the irritable power and an analogon
of voluntary motion first dawn on us in the vegetable
world, in the stamina, and anthers, at the period of impregnation.
Then, as if Nature had been encouraged by
the success of the first experiment, both the one and the
other appear as predominance and general character.
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The insect world is the exponent of irritability,
as the vegetable is of reproduction.</hi>
</p>

<p>
With the ascent in power, the intensity of individuation
keeps even pace; and from this we may explain all the
characteristic distinctions between this class and that of
the vermes. The almost homogeneous jelly of the animalcula
<pb n="076"/><anchor id="Pg076"/>
infusoria became, by a vital oxydation, granular
in the polypi. This granulation formed itself into distinct
organs in the molluscæ; while for the snails, which are the
next step, the animalized lime, that seemed the sole final
cause of the life of the polypi, assumes all the characters of
an ulterior purpose. Refined into a horn-like substance, it
becomes to the snails the substitute of an organ, and their
outward skeleton. Yet how much more manifold and
definite, the organization of an insect, than that of the
preceding class, the patient researches of Swammerdam
and Lyonnet have evinced, to the delight and admiration
of every reflecting mind.
</p>

<p>
In the insect, for the first time, we find the distinct
commencement of a separation between the exponents of
sensibility and those of irritability; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> between the
<emph>nervous</emph> and the <emph>muscular</emph> system. The latter, however,
asserts its pre-eminence throughout. The prodigal provision
of organs for the purposes of respiration, and the
marvellous powers which numerous tribes of insects possess,
of accommodating the most corrupted airs, for a
longer or shorter period, to the support of their excitability,
would of itself lead us to presume, that here the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">vis
irritabilis</foreign> is the reigning dynasty. There is here no confluence
of nerves into one reservoir, as evidence of the
independent existence of sensibility <emph>as</emph> sensibility;&mdash;and
therefore no counterpoise of a vascular system, as a distinct
exponent of the irritable pole. The whole muscularity of
these animals, is the organ of irritability; and the nerves
themselves are probably feeders of the motory power.
The petty rills of sensibility flow into the full expanse of
irritability, and there lose themselves. The nerves appertaining
<pb n="077"/><anchor id="Pg077"/>
to the senses, on the other hand, are indistinct,
and comparatively unimportant. The multitude of immovable
eyes appear not so much conductors of light, as
its ultimate recipient. We are almost tempted to believe
that they constitute, rather than subserve, their sensorium.
</p>

<p>
These eye-facets form the sense of light, rather than
organs of seeing. Their almost paradoxical number at
least, and the singularity of their forms, render it probable
that they impel the animal by some modification of its
irritability, herein likewise containing a striking analogy
to the known influence of light on plants, than as excitements
of sensibility. The sense that is nearest akin to
irritability, and which alone resides in the muscular system,
is that of touch, or feeling. This, therefore, is the first
sense that emerges. Being confined to absolute contact,
it occupies the lowest rank; but for that very reason it is
the ground of all the other senses, which act, according
to the ratio of their ascent, at still increasing distances,
and become more and more ideal, from the tentacles of
the polypus, to the human eye; which latter might be defined
the outward organ of the identity, or at least of the
indifference, of the real and ideal. But as the calcareous
residuum of the lowest class approaches to the nature of
horn in the snail, so the cumbrous shell of the snail has
been transformed into polished and moveable plates of defensive
armour in the insect. Thus, too, the same power
of progressive individuation articulates the tentacula of
the polypus and holothuria into antennæ; thereby manifesting
the full emersion and eminency of irritability as a
power which acts in, and gives its own character to, that
of reproduction. The least observant must have noticed
<pb n="078"/><anchor id="Pg078"/>
the lightning-like rapidity with which the insect tribes
devour and eliminate their food, as by an instinctive necessity,
and in the least degree for the purposes of the
animal's own growth or enlargement. The same predominance
of irritability, and at the same time a new start
in individuation, is shown in the reproductive power as
generation. There is now a regular projection,
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ab intra
ad extra</foreign>, for which neither sprouts nor cuttings can any
longer be the substitutes. We have not space for further
detail; but there is one point too strikingly illustrative
and even confirmative of the proposed system, to be omitted
altogether. We mean the curious fact, that the same
characteristic tendency, <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">ad extra</foreign>, which in the males and
females of certain insect tribes is realized in the functions
of generation, conception, and parturiency, manifests and
expands itself in the <emph>sexless</emph> individuals (which are always
in this case the great majority of the species), as instincts
of art, and in the construction of works completely detached
and inorganic; while the geometric regularity of
these works, which bears an analogy to crystallization, is
demonstrably no more than the necessary result of uniform
action in a compressed multitude.
</p>

<p>
Again, as the insect world, averaging the whole, comes
nearest to plants, (whose very essence is reproduction,)
in the multitude of their germs; so does it resemble
plants in the sufficiency of a single impregnation for the
evolution of myriads of detached lives. Even so, the metamorphoses
of insects, from the egg to the maggot and
caterpillar, and from these, through the nympha and
aurelia into the perfect insect, are but a more individuated
and intenser form of a similar transformation of the plant
<pb n="079"/><anchor id="Pg079"/>
from the seed-leaflets, or cotyledons, through the stalk,
the leaves, and the calyx, into the perfect flower, the
various colours of which seem made for the reflection of
light, as the antecedent grade to the burnished scales,
and scale-like eyes of the insect. Nevertheless, with all
this seeming prodigality of organic power, the whole tendency
is <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ad extra</foreign>,
and the life of insects, as electricity in
the quadrate, acts chiefly on the superficies of their bodies,
to which we may add the negative proof arising from the
absence of sensibility. It is well known, that the two
halves of a divided insect have continued to perform, or
attempt, each their separate functions, the trunkless head
feeding with its accustomed voracity, while the headless
trunk has exhibited its appropriate excitability to the
sexual influence.
</p>

<p>
The intropulsive force, that sends the ossification inward
as to the centre, is reserved for a yet higher step,
and this we find embodied in the class of <emph>fishes</emph>. Even
here, however, the process still seems imperfect, and (as
it were) initiatory. The skeleton has left the surface,
indeed, but the bones approach to the nature of gristle.
To feel the truth of this, we need only compare the most
perfect bone of a fish with the thigh-bones of the mammalia,
and the distinctness with which the latter manifest
the co-presence of the <emph>magnetic</emph> power in its solid parietes,
of the <emph>electrical</emph> in its branching arteries, and of the
third greatest power, viz., the <emph>qualitative</emph> and interior,
in its marrow. The senses of fish are more distinct
than those of insects. Thus, the intensity of its sense of
smell has been placed beyond doubt, and rises in the extent
of its sphere far beyond the irritable sense, or the
<pb n="080"/><anchor id="Pg080"/>
feeling, in insects. I say the <emph>feeling</emph>, not the touch;
for the touch seems, as it were, a supervention to the
feeling, a perfection <emph>given</emph> to it by the reaction of the
higher powers. As the feeling of the insect, in subtlety
and virtual distance, rises above the solitary sense of taste<note place="foot">The
remark on the feeling of the antennæ, compared with the touch of
man, or even of the half-reasoning elephant, is yet more applicable to the
taste, which in these gelatinous animals might, perhaps not inappropriately,
be entitled the gastric sense.</note>
in the mollusca, so does the smell of the fish rise above
the feeling of the insect. In the fish, likewise, the eyes
are single and moveable, while it is remarkable that the
only insect that possesses this latter privilege, is an inhabitant
of the waters. Finally, here first, unequivocally,
and on a <emph>large</emph> scale, (for I pretend not to control the
freedom, in which the necessity of Nature is rooted, by the
precise limits of a system,)&mdash;here first, Nature exhibits,
in the power of sensibility, the consummation of those
vital forms (the <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">nisus formativi</foreign>) the adequate and the sole
measure of which is to be sought for in their several organic
products. But as if a weakness of exhaustion had
attended this advance in the same moment it was made,
Nature seems necessitated to fall back, and re-exert herself
on the lower ground which she had before occupied,
that of the vital magnetism, or the power of reproduction.
The intensity of this latter power in the fishes, is shown
both in their voracity and in the number of their eggs,
which we are obliged to calculate by <emph>weight</emph>, not by <emph>tale</emph>.
There is an equal intensity both of the <emph>immanent</emph> and the
<emph>projective</emph> reproduction, in which, if we take in the comparative
number of individuals in each species, and likewise
<pb n="081"/><anchor id="Pg081"/>
the different intervals between the acts, the fish (it is
probable) would be found to stand in a similar relation to
the insect, as the insect, in the latter point, stands to the
system of vegetation. Meantime, the fish sinks a step
below the insect, in the mode and circumstances of impregnation.
To this we will venture to add, the predominance
of <emph>length</emph>, as the <emph>form</emph> of growth in so large a
proportion of the known orders of fishes, and not less of
their rectilineal path of motion. In all other respects,
the correspondence combined with the progress in individuation,
is striking in the whole detail. Thus the eye,
in addition to its moveability, has besides acquired a saline
moisture in its higher development, as accordant with the
life of its element. Add to these the glittering covering
in both, the splendour of the scales in the one answering
to the brilliant plates in the other,&mdash;the luminous reservoirs
of the fire-flies,&mdash;the phosphorescence and electricity
of many fishes,&mdash;the same analogs of moral qualities, in
their rapacity, boldness, modes of seizing their prey by
surprise,&mdash;their gills, as presenting the intermediate state
between the spiracula of the grade next below, and the
lungs of the step next above, both extremes of which seem
combined in the structure of birds and of their quill-feathers;
but above all, the convexity of the crystalline
lens, so much greater than in birds, quadrupeds, and man,
and seeming to collect, in one powerful organ, the hundred-fold
microscopic facettes of the insect's <emph>light</emph> organs; and
it will not be easy to resist the conviction, that the same
power is at work in both, and reappears under higher
auspices. The intention of Nature is repeated; but, as
was to have been expected, with two main differences.
</p>

<pb n="082"/><anchor id="Pg082"/>

<p>
First, that in the lower grade the reproductions themselves
seem merged in those of irritability, from the very circumstance
that the latter constitutes no pole, either to the
former, or to sensibility. The force of irritability acts,
therefore, in the insect world, in full predominance; while
the emergence of sensibility in the fish calls forth the opposite
pole of reproduction, as a <emph>distinct</emph> power, and causes
therefore the irritability to flow, in part, into the power of
reproduction. The second result of this ascent is the
direction of the organizing power, <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">ad intra</foreign>, with the consequent
greater simplicity of the exterior form, and the
substitution of condensed and flexible force, with comparative
unity of implements, for that variety of tools, almost
as numerous as the several objects to which they are to
be applied, which arises from, and characterises, the superficial
life of the insect creation. This grade of ascension,
however, like the former, is accompanied by an apparent
retrograde movement. For from this very accession of
vital intensity we must account for the absence in the
fishes of all the formative, or rather (if our language will
permit it) <emph>fabricative</emph> instincts. How could it be otherwise?
These instincts are the surplus and projection of the organizing
power in the direction <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">ad extra</foreign>, and could not,
therefore, have been expected in the class of animals that
represent the first intuitive effort of organization, and are
themselves the product of its first movement in the direction
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ad intra</foreign>.
But Nature never loses what she has once
learnt, though in the acquirement of each new power she
intermits, or performs less energetically, the act immediately
preceding. She often drops a faculty, but never
fails to pick it up again. She may seem forgetful and
<pb n="083"/><anchor id="Pg083"/>
absent, but it is only to recollect herself with <emph>additional</emph>,
as well as <emph>recruited</emph> vigour, in some after and higher state;
as if the sleep of powers, as well as of bodies, were the
season and condition of their growth. Accordingly, we
find these instincts again, and with them a wonderful
synthesis of fish and insect, as a higher third, in the
feathered inhabitants of the air. Nay, she seems to have
gone yet further back, and having given B + C = D in
the birds, so to have sported with one solitary instance of
B + D = A in that curious animal the dragon, the anatomy
of which has been recently given to the public by
Tiedemann; from whose work it appears, that this creature
presents itself to us with the wings of the insect, and with
the nervous system, the brain, and the cranium of the
bird, in their several rudiments.
</p>

<p>
The synthesis of fish and insect in the birds, might be
illustrated equally in detail with the former; but it will be
sufficient for our purpose, that as in both the former cases,
the insect and the fish, so here in that of the birds, the
powers are under the predominance of irritability; the
sensibility being dormant in the first, awakening in the
second, and awake, but still subordinate, in the third. Of
this my limits confine me to a single presumptive proof,
viz., the superiority in strength and courage of the female
in the birds of prey. For herein, indeed, does the difference
of the sexes universally consist, wherever both the
forces are developed, that the female is characterised by
quicker irritability, and the male by deeper sensibility.
How large a stride has been now made by Nature in the
progress of individuation, what ornithologist does not
know? From a multitude of instances we select the most
<pb n="084"/><anchor id="Pg084"/>
impressive, the power of sound, with the first rudiments
of modulation! That all languages designate the melody
of birds as singing (though according to Blumenbach man
only sings, while birds do but whistle), demonstrates that
it has been felt as, what indeed it is, a tentative and prophetic
prelude of something yet to come. With this conjoin
the power and the tendency to acquire articulation,
and to imitate speech; conjoin the building instinct and
the migratory, the monogamy of several species, and the
pairing of almost all; and we shall have collected new
instances of the usage (I dare not say law) according to
which Nature lets fall, in order to resume, and steps backward
the furthest, when she means to leap forwards with
the greatest concentration of energy.
</p>

<p>
For lo! in the next step of ascent the power of sensibility
has assumed her due place and rank: her minority
is at an end, and the complete and universal presence of
a nervous system unites absolutely, by instanteity of time
what, with the due allowances for the transitional process,
had before been either lost in sameness, or perplexed by
multiplicity, or compacted by a finer mechanism. But
with this, all the analogies with which Nature had delighted
us in the preceding step seem lost, and, with the single
exception of that more than valuable, that estimable
philanthropist, the dog, and, perhaps, of the horse and
elephant, the analogies to ourselves, which we can discover
in the quadrupeds or quadrumani, are of our vices, our
follies, and our imperfections. The facts in confirmation
of both the propositions are so numerous and so obvious,
the advance of Nature, under the predominance of the
third synthetic power, both in the intensity of life and in
<pb n="085"/><anchor id="Pg085"/>
the intenseness and extension of individuality, is so undeniable,
that we may leap forward at once to the highest
realization and reconciliation of both her tendencies, that
of the most perfect detachment with the greatest possible
union, to that last work, in which Nature did not assist
as handmaid under the eye of her sovereign Master, who
made Man in his own image, by superadding self-consciousness
with self-government, and breathed into him
a living soul.
</p>

<p>
The class of <hi rend='italic'>Vermes</hi> deposit a calcareous stuff, as if it had
torn loose from the earth a piece of the gross mass which it
must still drag about with it. In the insect class this
residuum has refined itself. In the fishes and amphibia it
is driven back or inward, the organic power begins to be
intuitive, and sensibility appears. In the birds the bones
have become hollow; while, with apparent proportional
recess, but, in truth, by the excitement of the opposite
pole, their exterior presents an actual vegetation. The
bones of the mammalia are filled up, and their coverings
have become more simple. Man possesses the most perfect
osseous structure, the least and most insignificant
covering. The whole force of organic power has attained
an inward and centripetal direction. He has the whole
world in counterpoint to him, but he contains an entire
world within himself. Now, for the first time at the apex
of the living pyramid, it is Man and Nature, but Man
himself is a syllepsis, a compendium of Nature&mdash;the
Microcosm! Naked and helpless cometh man into the
world. Such has been the complaint from eldest time;
but we complain of our chief privilege, our ornament, and
the connate mark of our sovereignty.
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">Porphyrigeniti sumus</foreign>!
<pb n="086"/><anchor id="Pg086"/>
In Man the centripetal and individualizing tendency
of all Nature is itself concentred and individualized&mdash;he
is a revelation of Nature! Henceforward, he is
referred to himself, delivered up to his own charge; and
he who stands the most on himself, and stands the firmest,
is the truest, because the most individual, Man. In social
and political life this acme is inter-dependence; in moral
life it is independence; in intellectual life it is genius.
Nor does the form of polarity, which has accompanied the
law of individuation up its whole ascent, desert it here.
As the height, so the depth. The intensities must be at
once opposite and equal. As the liberty, so must be the
reverence for law. As the independence, so must be the
service and the submission to the Supreme Will! As the
ideal genius and the originality, in the same proportion
must be the resignation to the real world, the sympathy
and the inter-communion with Nature. In the conciliating
mid-point, or equator, does the Man live, and only by its
equal presence in both its poles can that life be manifested!
</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>
If it had been possible, within the prescribed limits of
this essay, to have deduced the philosophy of Life synthetically,
the evidence would have been carried over from
section to section, and the <foreign lang="la"
rend="font-style: italic">quod erat demonstrandum</foreign>
at the conclusion of one section would reappear as the
principle of the succeeding&mdash;the goal of the one would be
the starting-post of the other. Positions arranged in my
own mind, as intermediate and organic links of administration,
must be presented to the reader in the first instance,
at least, as a mere hypothesis.  Instead of
<pb n="087"/><anchor id="Pg087"/>
demanding his assent as a right, I must solicit a suspension
of his judgment as a courtesy; and, after all, however
firmly the hypothesis may support the phenomena piled
upon it, we can deduce no more than a practical rule,
grounded on a strong presumption. The license of
arithmetic, however, furnishes instances that a rule may
be usefully applied in practice, and for the particular
purpose may be sufficiently authenticated by the result,
before it has itself been duly demonstrated. It is enough,
if only it hath been rendered fully intelligible.
</p>

<p>
In a system where every position proceeds from a
scientific preconstruction, a power acting exclusively in
length, would be magnetism by virtue of our own definition
of the term. In like manner, a surface power would
be electricity, as far as that system was concerned, whether
it accorded or not with the facts ordinarily so called. But
it is incumbent on us, who must treat the subject
<emph>analytically</emph>, to show by experiment that magnetism does
in fact act longitudinally, and electricity superficially; and
that, consequently, the former is distinguished from, and
yet contained in, the latter, as a straight line is distinguished
from, yet contained in, a superficies.
</p>

<p>
First, that magnetism, in its conductors, seeks and
follows length only, and by the length is itself conducted,
has been proved by Brugmans, in his philosophical Essay
on the Matter of Magnetism, where he relates that a
magnet capable of supporting a body four times heavier
than itself, and which acted as a magnetic needle at the
distance of twenty inches, was so weakened by the interposition
of three cast-iron plates of considerable thickness,
as scarcely to move the magnetic needle from its place at
<pb n="088"/><anchor id="Pg088"/>
a distance of only three inches. A similar experiment
had been made by Descartes. I concluded, therefore,
said Brugmans, that if the iron plates were interposed
between the magnet and the needle lengthways, instead
of breadthways or right across, the action of the magnet
on the magnetic needle would, in consequence of this
great increase of resistance, become still weaker, or perhaps
evanescent. But not less to my surprise than my
admiration, I found that the power of the magnet was so
far from being <emph>diminished</emph> by this change in the relative
position of the iron-plates; that, on the contrary, it now
extended to a far greater distance than when no iron at
all was interposed. Some time after the same philosopher,
out of several iron bars, the sides of which were an inch
broad each, composed a single bar of the length of more
than ten feet, and observed the magnetism make its way
through the whole mass. But, in order to try whether
the action could be propagated to any length indefinitely,
after several experiments with bars of intermediate lengths,
in all of which he had succeeded, he tried a four-cornered
iron rod, more than twenty feet long, and it was at this
length that the magnetic power first began to be diminished.
So far Brugmans.
</p>

<p>
But the shortest way for any one to convince himself
of this relation of the magnetic power would be, in one
and the same experiment, to interpose the same piece of iron
between the magnet and the compass needle first <emph>breadthways</emph>;
and in this case it will be found that the needle,
which had been previously deflected by the magnet from
its natural position at one of its poles, will instantly resume
the same, either wholly or very nearly so&mdash;then to
<pb n="089"/><anchor id="Pg089"/>
interpose the same piece of iron <emph>lengthways</emph>; in which
case the position of the compass needle will be scarcely
or not at all affected.
</p>

<p>
The assertion of Bernoulli and others, that the absolute
force of the artificial magnet increases in the ratio
of its superficies, stands corrected in the far more accurate
experiments of Coulomb (published in his Treatise on
Magnetism), which proves that the increase takes place
(in a far greater degree) in the ratio of its length. The
same naturalist even found means to determine that the
directing powers of the needle, which he had measured by
help of his <foreign lang="fr" rend="font-style: italic">balance
de tortion</foreign>, stand to the length of the
needle in such a ratio as that, provided only the length of
the needle is from forty to fifty times its diameter, the
momenta of these directing powers will increase in the
very same direct proportion as the length is increased.
Nor is this all that may be deduced from the experiment
last mentioned. If only the magnet be strong enough,
it will show likewise that magnetism <emph>seeks</emph> the length.
The proof is contained in the remarkable fact, that the
iron interposed between the magnet and the magnetic
needle <emph>breadthways</emph> constantly acquires its two opposite
poles at both ends <emph>lengthways</emph>. Though the preceding
experiments are abundantly sufficient to prove the position,
yet the following deserves mention for the beautiful clearness
of its evidence. If the magnetic power is determined
exclusively by length, it is to be expected that it will
manifest no force, where the piece of iron is of such a
shape that no one dimension predominates. Bring a
<emph>cube</emph> of iron near the magnetic needle and it will not exert
the slightest degree of power beyond what belongs to it
<pb n="090"/><anchor id="Pg090"/>
as mere iron. By the perfect equality of the dimensions,
the magnetism of the earth appears, as it were, perplexed
and doubtful. Now, then attach a second cube of iron
to the first, and the instantaneous act of the iron on the
magnetic needle will make it manifest that with the length
thus given, the magnetic influence is given at the same
moment.
</p>

<p>
That electricity, on the other hand, does not act in
length merely, is clear, from the fact that every electric
body is electric over its whole surface. But that electricity
acts both in length and breadth, and <emph>only</emph> in length
and breadth, and not in depth; in short, that the (so-called)
electrical fluid in an electrified body spreads over
the whole surface of that body without penetrating it, or
tending <foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ad intra</foreign>,
may be proved by direct experiment.
Take a cylinder of wood, and bore an indefinite number
of holes in it, each of them four lines in depth and four
in diameter. Electrify this cylinder, and present to its
superficies a small square of gold-leaf, held to it by an
insulating needle of gum lac, and bring this square to an
electrometer of great sensibility. The electrometer will
instantly show an electricity in the gold-leaf, similar to
that of the cylinder which had been brought into contact
with it. The square of gold-leaf having thus been discharged
of its electricity, put it carefully into one of the
holes of the cylinder, <emph>so</emph>, namely, that it shall touch only
the bottom of the hole, and present it again to the electrometer.
It will be then found that the electrometer
will exhibit no signs of electricity whatsoever. From this
it follows, that the electricity which had been communicated
to the cylinder had confined itself to the <emph>surface</emph>.
</p>

<pb n="091"/><anchor id="Pg091"/>

<p>
If the time and the limit prescribed would admit, we could
multiply experiments, all tending to prove the same law;
but we must be content with the barely sufficient. But
that the <emph>chemical process</emph> acts in <emph>depth</emph>, and first, therefore,
<emph>realizes</emph> and integrates the fluxional power of magnetism
and electricity, is involved in the <emph>term</emph> composition; and
this will become still more convincing when we have learnt
to regard <emph>decomposition</emph> as a mere co-relative,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> as decomposition
relatively to the body decomposed, but composition
<emph>actually</emph> and in respect of the substances, <emph>into</emph>
which it was decomposed. The alteration in the specific
gravity of metals in their chemical amalgams, interesting
as the fact is in all points, is <emph>decisive</emph> in the present; for
gravity is the sole <emph>inward</emph> of inorganic bodies&mdash;it
<emph>constitutes</emph> their depth.
</p>

<p>
I can now, for the first time, give to my opinions
that degree of intelligibility, which is requisite for their
introduction as hypotheses; the experiments above related,
understood as in the common mode of thinking, prove
that the magnetic influence flows in length, the electric
fluid by suffusion, and that chemical agency (whatever
the main agent may be) is qualitative and
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">in intimis</foreign>.
Now my hypothesis demands the converse of all this.
I affirm that a power, acting exclusively in length, is
(wherever it be found) <emph>magnetism</emph>; that a power which
acts <emph>both</emph> in length and in breadth, and <emph>only</emph> in length and
breadth, is (wherever it be found) <emph>electricity</emph>; and finally,
that a power which, together with length and breadth,
includes depth likewise, is (wherever it be found) <emph>constructive
agency</emph>. That is but <emph>one</emph> phenomenon of magnetism,
to which we have appropriated and confined the
<pb n="092"/><anchor id="Pg092"/>
term magnetism; because of all the natural bodies at
present known, iron, and one or two of its nearest relatives
in the family of hard yet coherent metals, are the only
ones, in which all the conditions are collected, under
which alone the magnetic agency can appear in and during
the act itself. When, therefore, I affirm the power of
reproduction in organized bodies to be magnetism, I
must be understood to mean that this power, as it exists in
the magnet, and which we there (to use a strong phrase)
catch in the very act, is to the same kind of power, working
as reproductive, what the root is to the cube of that root.
We no more confound the force in the compass needle
with that of reproduction, than a man can be said to
confound his liver with a lichen, because he affirms that
both of them grow.
</p>

<p>
The same precautions are to be repeated in the identification
of electricity with irritability; and the power of
depth, for which we have yet no appropriated term, with
sensibility. How great the distance is in all, and that the
lowest degrees are adopted as the exponent terms, not for
their own sakes, but merely because they may be used
with less hazard of diverting the attention from the <emph>kind</emph>
by peculiar properties arising out of the degree, is evident
from the third instance, unless the theorist can be supposed
insane enough to apply sensation in good earnest to the
effervescence of an acid or an alkali, or to sympathise with
the distresses of a vat of new beer when it is working. In
whatever way the subject could be treated, it must have
remained unintelligible to men who, if they think of space
at all, abstract their notion of it from the contents of an
exhausted receiver. With this, and with an ether, such
<pb n="093"/><anchor id="Pg093"/>
men may work wonders; as what, indeed, cannot be done
with a plenum and a vacuum, when a theorist has privileged
himself to assume the one, or the other,
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ad libitum</foreign>?&mdash;in
all innocence of heart, and undisturbed by the reflection
that the two things cannot both be true. That both time
and space are mere abstractions I am well aware; but
I know with equal certainty that what is <emph>expressed</emph> by
them as the <emph>identity</emph> of both is the highest reality, and the
root of all power, the power to suffer, as well as the power
to act. However mere an
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">ens logicum</foreign> space may be, the
<emph>dimensions</emph> of space are real, and the works of Galileo, in more
than one elegant passage, prove with what awe and amazement
they fill the mind that worthily contemplates them.
Dismissing, therefore, all facts of degrees, as introduced
merely for the purposes of illustration, I would make
as little reference as possible to the magnet, the charged
phial, or the processes of the laboratory, and designate
the three powers in the process of our animal life, each
by two co-relative terms, the one expressing the <emph>form</emph>,
and the other the <emph>object</emph> and <emph>product</emph> of the power. My
hypothesis will, therefore, be thus expressed, that the
constituent forces of life in the human living body are&mdash;first,
the power of length, or <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">REPRODUCTION</hi>;
second, the power of surface (that is, length and breadth), or
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">IRRITABILITY</hi>;
third, the power of depth, or <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">SENSIBILITY</hi>.
With this observation I may conclude these remarks, only
reminding the reader that Life itself is neither of these
separately, but the copula of all three&mdash;that Life, <emph>as</emph>
Life, supposes a positive or universal principle in Nature,
with a negative principle in every particular animal, the
latter, or limitative power, constantly acting to individualize,
<pb n="094"/><anchor id="Pg094"/>
and, as it were, <emph>figure</emph> the former. <emph>Thus</emph>, then,
Life itself is not a <emph>thing</emph>&mdash;a self-subsistent
<emph>hypostasis</emph>&mdash;but an <emph>act</emph> and <emph>process</emph>;
which, pitiable as the prejudice will appear to the
<foreign lang="la" rend="font-style: italic">forts esprits</foreign>,
is a great deal more than
either my reason would authorise or my conscience allow
me to assert&mdash;concerning the Soul, as the principle both
of Reason and Conscience.
</p>

</div>

<pb n="097"/><anchor id="Pg097"/>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Advertisements.</head>

<ab><hi rend='italic'>October, 1848.</hi></ab>

<ab>Works on Medicine and Science<lb/>
Published by John Churchill.</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>Dr. Golding Bird, F.R.S.</ab>

<ab>The Diagnosis, Pathological Indications
And Treatment of Urinary Deposits. With Engravings
on Wood. Second Edition. Post 8vo. cloth, 8<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi></ab>

<ab>By The Same Author.</ab>

<ab>
Elements of Natural Philosophy; being an
Experimental Introduction to the Study of the Physical Sciences.
Illustrated with several Hundred Wood-cuts. Third Edition. Fcap.
8vo. cloth, 12<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>Mr. Beasley.</ab>

<ab>
The Pocket Formulary and Synopsis of
The British And Foreign Pharmacopœias; comprising
Standard and Improved Formulæ for the Preparations and
Compounds employed in Medical Practice. Fourth Edition, corrected
and enlarged. 18mo. cloth, 6<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>Dr. Henry Bennett.</ab>

<ab>
A Practical Treatise on Inflammation,
Ulceration, And Induration of the Neck of
The Uterus; with Remarks on Leucorrhœa and Prolapsus Uteri,
as Symptoms of this form of Disease. 8vo. cloth, 6<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>Dr. Budd, F.R.S.</ab>

<ab>
On Diseases of the Liver; illustrated with
Coloured Plates and Engravings on Wood. 8vo. cloth, 14<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>
Sir James Clark, Bart., M.D.
</ab>

<ab>
On The Sanative Influence of Climate.
With an Account of the best Places of Resort for Invalids in England,
the South of Europe, &amp;c. Fourth Edition, revised. Post 8vo. 10<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>
Dr. Carpenter, F.R.S.<lb/>
A Manual of Physiology; specially designed for
the Use of Students. With numerous Illustrations on Steel and Wood.
Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 12<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>
</ab>

<pb n="098"/><anchor id="Pg098"/>

<ab>Dr. Carpenter, F.R.S.</ab>

<ab>
Principles of General and Comparative
Physiology; intended as an Introduction to the Study of
Human Physiology, and as a Guide to the Philosophical Pursuit of
Natural History. Illustrated with numerous Figures on Copper and
Wood. The Second Edition. 8vo. cloth, 18<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<ab>By The Same Author.</ab>

<ab>
Principles of Human Physiology.
numerous Illustrations on Steel and Wood. Third Edition. One
thick 8vo. vol. 21<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>Sir Astley Cooper, Bart., F.R.S.</ab>

<ab>
A Treatise on Dislocations and Fractures
of the Joints. Edited by Bransby b. Cooper,
F.R.S. 8vo. cloth, 20<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<ab>
Sir Astley Cooper left very considerable additions in MS. for the express
purpose of being introduced into this Edition.
</ab>

<ab>
By The Same Author.
</ab>

<ab>
Observations on the Structure and
Diseases of the Testis. Illustrated with Twenty-four
highly-finished coloured Plates. Second Edition. Royal 4to. cloth.
</ab>

<ab>
<hi rend='italic'>Reduced from</hi> 3<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> 3<hi rend='italic'>s. to</hi> 1<hi rend='italic'>l.</hi> 10<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>Dr. Conolly.</ab>

<ab>
The Construction and Government of
Lunatic Asylums and Hospitals for the Insane.
With Plans, post 8vo. cloth, 6<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>Mr. Cooley.</ab>

<ab>Comprehensive Supplement to the Pharmacopœia</ab>

<ab>
The Cyclopædia of Practical Receipts,
and Collateral Information in the Arts,
Manufactures, and Trades, Including Medicine,
Pharmacy, and Domestic Economy; designed
as a Compendious Book of Reference for the Manufacturer, Tradesman,
Amateur, and Heads of Families. Second Edition, in one thick volume
of 800 pages. 8vo. cloth, 14<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<ab>Mr. Fergusson, F.R.S.E.</ab>

<ab>
A System of Practical Surgery; with numerous
Illustrations on Wood. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. cloth,
12<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>
</ab>

<pb n="099"/><anchor id="Pg099"/>

<ab>Mr. Churchill's Publications.</ab>

<ab>Mr. Fownes, PH. D., F.R.S.</ab>

<ab>
A Manual of Chemistry; with numerous Illustrations
on Wood. Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. cloth,
12<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>
</ab>

<ab>
<q>An admirable exposition of the present state of chemical science, simply and
clearly written.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>British and Foreign Medical Review.</hi>
</ab>

<ab>By The Same Author.</ab>

<ab>
Introduction to Qualitative Analysis.
Post 8vo. cloth, 2<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>
</ab>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
<!-- Local Variables: -->
<!-- coding:utf-8-unix -->
<!-- End: -->
